<h2>
CHAPTER I
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">K</span><span class="smallcaps">enneth
Harper</span> gazed slowly around his office. A smile of satisfaction
wreathed his face, reflecting his inward contentment. He felt like a
runner who sees ahead of him the coveted goal towards which he has been
straining through many gruelling miles. Kenneth was tired but he gave no
thought to his weariness. Two weeks of hard work, countless annoyances,
seemingly infinite delays—all were now forgotten in the warm glow which
pervaded his being. He, Kenneth B. Harper, M.D., was now ready to
receive the stream of patients he felt sure was coming.</p>
<p>He walked around the room and fingered with almost loving tenderness
the newly installed apparatus. He adjusted and readjusted the
examining-table of shining nickel and white enamel which had arrived
that morning from New York. He arranged again the black leather pads and
cushions. With his handkerchief he wiped imaginary spots of dust from
the plate glass door and shelves of the instrument case, though his
sister Mamie had polished them but half an hour before until they shone
with crystal clearness. Instrument after instrument he fondled with the
air of a connoisseur examining a rare bit of porcelain. He fingered
critically their various 
parts to see if all were in perfect condition. He tore a stamp from an
old letter and placed it under the lens of the expensive microscope
adjusting and readjusting until every feature of the stamp stood out
clearly even to the most infinite detail. He raised and lowered half a
dozen times or more the lid of the nickelled sterilizer. He set at
various angles the white screen which surrounded the examining-table,
viewed it each time from different corners of the room, and rearranged
it until it was set just right. He ran his hand over the card index
files in his small desk. He looked at the clean white cards with the
tabs on them—the cards which, though innocent now of writing, he hoped
and expected would soon be filled with the names of innumerable sick
people he was treating.</p>
<p>His eye caught what he thought was a pucker in the
grey-and-blue-chequered linoleum which covered the floor. He went over
and moved the sectional bookcase containing his volumes on obstetrics,
on gynæcology, on <i>materia medica</i>, on the diseases he knew he
would treat as a general practitioner of medicine in so small a place as
Central City. No, that wasn’t a pucker—it was only the light from the
window striking it at that angle.</p>
<p>“Dr. Kenneth B. Harper, Physician and Surgeon.” He spelled out the
letters which were painted on the upper panes of the two windows facing
on State Street. It thrilled him that eight years of hard work had ended
and he now was at the point in his life towards which he had longingly
looked all those years. 
Casting his eyes again around the office, he went into the adjoining
reception room.</p>
<p>Kenneth threw himself in utter exhaustion into one of the comfortable
arm-chairs there. His hands, long-fingered, tapering to slender points,
the hands of a pianist, an artist, whether of brush or chisel or
scalpel, hung over the sides in languid fashion. He was without coat or
vest. His shirt-sleeves were rolled back above his elbows, revealing
strongly muscled dark brown arms. His face was of the same richly
coloured brown. His mouth was sensitively shaped with evenly matched
strong white teeth. The eyes too were brown, usually sober and serious,
but flashing into a broad and friendly smile when there was occasion for
it. Brushed straight back from the broad forehead was a mass of wavy
hair, brown also but of a deeper shade, almost black. The chin was well
shaped.</p>
<p>As he lounged in the chair and looked around the reception room, he
appeared to be of medium height, rather well-proportioned, almost
stocky. Three years of baseball and football, and nearly two years of
army life with all its hardships, had thickened up the once rather
slender figure and had given to the face a more mature appearance,
different from the youthful, almost callow look he had worn when his
diploma had been handed him at the end of his college course.</p>
<p>The reception room was as pleasing to him as he sat there as had been
the private office. There were three or four more chairs like the one in
which he  sat. There was a
couch to match. The wall-paper was a subdued tan, serving as an
excellent background for four brightly coloured reproductions of good
pictures. Their brightness was matched by a vase of deep blue that stood
on the table. Beside the vase were two rows of magazines placed there
for perusal by his patients as they waited admittance to the more
austere room beyond. It was comfortable. It was in good taste—almost too
good taste, Kenneth thought, for a place like Central City in a section
like the southernmost part of Georgia. Some of the country folks and
even those in town would probably say it was too plain—didn’t have
enough colour about it. Oh, well, that wouldn’t matter, Kenneth thought.
They wouldn’t have to live there. Most of them would hardly notice it,
if they paid any attention at all to relatively minor and unimportant
things like colour schemes.</p>
<p>Kenneth felt that he had good reason to feel content with the present
outlook. He lighted a cigarette and settled himself more comfortably in
the deep chair and let his mind wander over the long trail he had
covered. He thought of the eight happy years he had spent at Atlanta
University—four of high school and four of college. He remembered
gratefully the hours of companionship with those men and women who had
left comfortable homes and friends in the North to give their lives to
the education of coloured boys and girls in Georgia. They were so
human—so sincere—so genuinely anxious to help. It wasn’t easy for them
to do it, either, for  it
meant ostracism and all its attendant unpleasantnesses to teach coloured
children in Georgia anything other than industrial courses. And they
were so different from the white folks he knew in Central City. Here he
had always been made to feel that because he was a “nigger” he was
predestined to inferiority. But there at Atlanta they had treated him
like a human being. He was glad he had gone to Atlanta University. It
had made him realize that all white folks weren’t bad—that there were
decent ones, after all.</p>
<p>And then medical school in the North! How eagerly he had looked
forward to it! The bustle, the air of alert and eager determination, the
lovely old ivied walls of the buildings where he attended classes. He
laughed softly to himself as he remembered how terribly lonesome he had
been that first day when as an ignorant country boy he found himself
really at a Northern school. That had been a hard night to get through.
Everybody had seemed so intent on doing something that was interesting,
going so rapidly towards the places where those interesting things were
to take place, greeting old friends and acquaintances affectionately and
with all the boisterous bonhomie that only youth, and college youth at
that, seem to be able to master. It had been a bitter pill for him to
swallow that he alone of all that seething, noisy, tremendous mass of
students, was alone—without friend or acquaintance—the one lonely figure
of the thousands around him.</p>
<p>That hadn’t lasted long though. Good old Bill  Van Vleet! That’s what
having family and money and prestige behind you did for a fellow! It was
a mighty welcome thing when old Bill came to him there as he sat
dejectedly that second morning on the campus and roused him out of his
gloom. And then the four years when Bill had been his closest friend. He
had been one wonderful free soul that knew no line of caste or race.</p>
<p>His friendship with Van Vleet seemed to Kenneth now almost like the
memory of a pleasant dream on awaking. Even then it had often seemed but
a fleeting, evanescent experience a wholly temporary arrangement that
was intended to last only through the four years of medical school.
Those times when Bill had invited him to spend Christmas holidays at his
home they had been hard invitations to get out of. Bill had been sincere
enough, no doubt of that. But Bill’s father—his mother—their
friends—would they—old Pennsylvania Dutch family that they were would
they be as glad to welcome a Negro into their home? He had always been
afraid to take the chance of finding that they wouldn’t. Decent enough
had they been when Bill introduced him to them on one of their visits to
Philadelphia. But—and this was a big “but”—there was a real difference
between being nice to a coloured friend of Bill’s at school and treating
that same fellow decently in their own home. Kenneth was conscious of a
vague feeling even now that he had not treated them fairly in judging
them by the white people of Central City. Yet, white folks were white
folks—and that’s that! Hadn’t his  father always told him that the best way to
get along with white people was to stay away from them and let them
alone as much as possible?</p>
<p>Through his mind passed memories of the many conversations he had had
with his father on that subject. Especially that talk together before he
had gone away to medical school. He didn’t know then it was the last
time he would see his father alive. He had had no way of knowing that
his father, always so rugged, so buoyantly healthy, so uncomplaining,
would die of appendicitis while he, Kenneth, was in France. If he had
only been at home!</p>
<p>He’d have known it wasn’t a case of plain cramps, as that old fossil,
Dr. Bennett, had called it. What was the exact way in which his father
had put his philosophy of life in the South during that last talk they
had had together? It had run like this: Any Negro can get along without
trouble in the South if he only attends to his own business. It was
unfortunate, mighty unpleasant and uncomfortable at times, that coloured
people, no matter what their standing, had to ride in Jim Crow cars,
couldn’t vote, couldn’t use the public libraries and all those other
things. Lynching, too, was bad. But only bad Negroes ever got lynched.
And, after all, those things weren’t all of life. Booker Washington was
right. And the others who were always howling about rights were wrong.
Get a trade or a profession. Get a home. Get some property. Get a bank
account. Do something! Be somebody! And then, when enough Negroes had
reached that stage, the ballot and all the  other things now denied them would come.
White folks then would see that the Negro was deserving of those rights
and privileges and would freely, gladly give them to him without his
asking for them. That was the way he felt. When Bill Van Vleet had urged
him to go with him to dinners or the theatre, he had had always some
excuse that Bill had to accept whether he had believed it or not. Good
Old Bill! They never knew during those more or less happy days what was
in store for them both.</p>
<p>Neither of them had known that the German Army was going to sweep
down through Belgium. Nor did they know that Bill was fated to end his
short but brilliant career as an aviator in a blazing, spectacular
descent behind the German lines, the lucky shot of a German
anti-aircraft gun.</p>
<p>Graduation. The diploma which gave him the right to call himself
“Dr. Kenneth B. Harper.” And then that stormy, yet advantageous year in
New York at Bellevue. Hadn’t they raised sand at his, a Negro’s
presumption in seeking that interneship at Bellevue! He’d almost lost
out. No Negro interne had ever been there before. If it hadn’t been for
Dr. Cox, to whom he had had a letter of introduction from his old
professor of pathology at school, he never would have got the chance.
But it had been worth it.</p>
<p>Kenneth lighted another cigarette and draped his legs over the arm of
the chair. It wasn’t bad at all to think of the things he had gone
through—now that they were over. Especially the army. Out of Bellevue
 one week when the chance
came to go to the Negro officers’ training-camp at Des Moines. First
lieutenant’s bars in the medical corps. Then the long months of training
and hard work at Camp Upton, relieved by occasional pleasant trips to
New York. Lucky he’d been assigned to the 367th of the 92nd Division.
Good to be near a real town like New York.</p>
<p>That had been some exciting ride across. And then the Meuse, the
Argonne, then Metz. God, but that was a terrible nightmare! Right back
of the lines had he been assigned. Men with arms and legs shot off. Some
torn to pieces by shrapnel. Some burned horribly by mustard gas. The
worse night had been when the Germans made that sudden attack at the
Meuse. For five days they had been fighting and working. That night he
had almost broken down. How he had cursed war! And those who made war.
And the civilization that permitted war—even made it necessary. Never
again for him! Seemed like a horrible dream—a nightmare worse than any
he had ever known as a boy when he’d eaten green apples or too much
mince pie.</p>
<p>That awful experience he had soon relegated to the background of his
mind. Especially when he was spending those blessed six months at the
Sorbonne. That had been another hard job to put over. They didn’t want
any Negroes staying in France. They’d howled and they’d brought up miles
of red tape. But he had ignored the howls and unwound the red tape.</p>
<p> And now, Central City
again. It was good to get back. Four—eight—sixteen years had he spent in
preparation. Now he was all ready to get to work at his profession. For
a time he’d have to do general practising. Had to make money. Then he’d
specialize in surgery—major surgery. Soon’s he got enough money ahead,
he’d build a sanitarium. Make of it as modern a hospital as he could
afford. He’d draw on all of South Georgia for his patients. Nearest one
now is Atlanta. All South Georgia—most of Florida—even from Alabama. Ten
years from now he’d have a place known and patronized by all the
coloured people in the South. Something like the Mayo Brothers up in
Rochester, Minnesota!</p>
<p>“Pretty nifty, eh, Ken?”</p>
<p>Kenneth, aroused suddenly from his retrospection and day-dreams,
jumped at the unexpected voice behind him. It was his younger brother,
Bob. He laughed a little shamefacedly at his having been startled.
Without waiting for a reply, Bob entered the room and sat on the edge of
the table facing Kenneth.</p>
<p>“Yep! Things are shaping up rather nicely. Everything’s here now but
the patients. And those’ll be coming along pretty soon, I believe,”
replied Kenneth confidently. He went on talking enthusiastically of the
castles in the air he had been building when Bob entered the room—of the
hospital he was going to erect—how he planned attending the State
Medical Convention every year to form contracts with other coloured
doctors of Georgia—how he was intending  to visit during the coming year all the
coloured physicians within a radius of a hundred miles of Central City
to enlist their support. He discussed the question of a name for the
hospital. How would Harper’s Sanitarium sound? Or would the Central City
Infirmary be better? Or the Hospital of South Georgia?</p>
<p>On and on Kenneth rambled, talking half to Bob, half in audible
continuation of his reverie before Bob had entered. But Bob wasn’t
listening to him. On his face was the usual half-moody,
half-discontented expression which Kenneth knew so well. Bob was looking
down the dusty expanse of the road which bore rather poorly the imposing
title of State Street. The house was located at the corner of Lee and
State Streets. It was set back about fifty feet from the streets, and
the yard outside showed the work of one who loved flowers. There was an
expanse of smooth lawn, dotted here and there with flowering beds of
pansies, of nasturtiums. There were several abundantly laden rose-bushes
and two of “cape jessamine” that filled the air with an intoxicating,
almost cloying sweetness.</p>
<p>Though it was a balmy October afternoon, the air languorous and
caressing, Bob shared none of the atmosphere’s lazy contentment. All
this riot of colours and odours served in no manner to remove from his
face the dissatisfied look that covered it. He listened to Kenneth’s
rhapsodies of what he intended accomplishing with what was almost a
grimace of distaste. He was taller than Kenneth, of slighter  build, but of the same rich
colouring of skin and with the same hair and features.</p>
<p>In spite of these physical resemblances between the two brothers,
there was a more intangible difference which clearly distinguished the
two. Kenneth was more phlegmatic, more of a philosophic turn of mind,
more content with his lot, able to forget himself in his work, and when
that was finished, in his books. Bob, on the other hand, was of a highly
sensitized nature, more analytical of mind, more easily roused to
passion and anger. This tendency had been developed since the death of
his father just before he completed his freshman year at Atlanta. The
death had necessitated his leaving school and returning to Central City
to act as administrator of his father’s estate. His experiences in
accomplishing this task had not been pleasant ones. He had been forced
to deal with the tricksters that infested the town. He had come in
contact with all the chicanery, the petty thievery, the padded accounts,
that only petty minds can devise. The utter impotence he had felt in
having no legal redress as a Negro had embittered him. Joe Harper, their
father, had been exceedingly careful in keeping account of all bills
owed and due him. Yet Bob had been forced to pay a number of bills of
which he could find no record in his father’s neatly kept papers. These
had aggregated somewhere between three and four thousand dollars.
Various white merchants of the town claimed that Joe Harper, his father,
owed them. Bob knew they were lying. Yet he could do nothing. No court
in South Georgia  would
have listened to his side of the story or paid more than perfunctory
attention to him. It was a case of a white man’s word against a Negro’s,
and a verdict against the Negro was sure even before the case was
opened.</p>
<p>Kenneth, on the other hand, had been a favourite of their quiet,
almost taciturn father. Always filled with ambition for his children,
Joe Harper had furnished Kenneth, as liberally as he could afford, the
money necessary for him to get the medical education he wanted. He had
not been a rich man but he had been comfortably fixed financially.
Starting out as a carpenter doing odd jobs around Central City, he had
gradually expanded his activities to the building of small houses and
later to larger homes and business buildings. Most of the two-story
buildings that lined Lee Street in the business section of Central City
had been built by him. White and coloured alike knew that when Joe
Harper took a contract, it would be done right. Aided by a frugal and
economical wife, he had purchased real estate and, though the profits
had been slow and small, had managed with his wife to accumulate during
their thirty-five years of married life between twenty and twenty-five
thousand dollars which he left at his death to his wife and three
children.</p>
<p>Kenneth had been furnished with the best that his father could
afford, while Bob, some ten years younger than his brother, had had to
wait until Kenneth finished school before he could begin his course. Bob
felt no jealousy of his favoured brother, yet  the experiences that had been his in Central
City while Kenneth was away had tended towards a bitterness which
frequently found expression on his face. He was the natural rebel,
revolt was a part of his creed. Kenneth was the natural pacifist—he
never bothered trouble until trouble bothered him. Even then, if he
could avoid it, he always did. It was not strange, therefore, that he
should have come home believing implicitly that his father was right
when he had said Kenneth could get along without trouble in Central City
as long as he attended to his own business.</p>
<p>Kenneth talked on and on, unfolding the plans he had made for the
extending of the influence of his hospital throughout the South. Bob,
occupied with his own thoughts, heard but little of it. Suddenly he
interrupted Kenneth with a sharply put question.</p>
<p>“Ken, why did you come back to Central City?” he asked. He went on
without waiting for a reply. “If I had had your chances of studying up
North and in France, and living where you don’t have to be A afraid of
getting into trouble with Crackers all the time, I’d rather’ve done
anything else than to come back to this rotten place to live the rest of
my life.”</p>
<p>Kenneth laughed easily, almost as though a five-year-old had asked
some exceedingly foolish question.</p>
<p>“Why did I come back?” he repeated. “That’s easy. I came back because
I can make more money here than anywhere else.”</p>
<p> “But that isn’t the
most important thing in life!” Bob exclaimed.</p>
<p>“Maybe not the most important,” Kenneth laughed, “but a mighty
convenient article to have lying around. I came back here where the bulk
of coloured people live and where they make money off their crops and
where there won’t be much trouble for me to build up a big
practice.”</p>
<p>“That’s an old argument,” retorted Bob. “Nearly a million coloured
people went North during the war and they’re making money there hand
over fist. You could make just as much money, if not more, in a city
like Detroit or Cleveland or New York, and you wouldn’t have to be
always afraid you’ve given offence to some of these damned ignorant
Crackers down here.”</p>
<p>“Oh, I suppose I could’ve made money there. Dr. Cox at Bellevue told
me I ought to stay there in New York and practise in Harlem, but I
wanted to come back home. I can do more good here, both for myself and
for the coloured people, than I could up there.” He paused and then
asserted confidently: “And I don’t think I’ll have any trouble down
here. Papa got along all right here in this town for more than fifty
years, and I reckon I can do it too.”</p>
<p>“But, Ken,” Bob protested, “the way things were when he came along
are a lot different from the way they are now. Just yesterday Old Man
Mygatt down to the bank got mad and told me I was an ‘impudent young
nigger that needed to be taught my place’ because  I called his hand on a note he claimed papa
owed the bank. He knew I knew he was lying, and that’s what made him so
mad. They’re already saying I’m not a ‘good nigger’ like papa was and
that education has spoiled me into thinking I’m as good as they are.
Good Lord, if I wasn’t any better than these ignorant Crackers in this
town, I’d go out and jump in the river.”</p>
<p>Bob was working himself into a temper. Kenneth interrupted him with a
good-natured smile as he said:</p>
<p>“Bob, you’re getting too pessimistic. You’ve been reading too many of
these coloured newspapers published in New York and Chicago and these
societies that’re always playing up some lynching or other trouble down
here—”</p>
<p>“What if I have? I don’t need to read them to know that things are
much worse to-day than they were a few years back. You haven’t lived
down here for nearly nine years and you don’t know how things are
changed.”</p>
<p>“It’s you who have changed—not conditions so much!” Kenneth answered.
“What if there are mean white folks? There are lots of other white
people who want to see the Negro succeed. Only this morning Dr. Bennett
told mamma he was glad I came back and he’d do what he could to help me.
And there’re lots more like”</p>
<p>“That’s nice of Dr. Bennett,” interjected Bob. “He can afford to talk
big—he’s got the practice of this town sewed up. And, most of all, he’s
a white man. Suppose some of these poor whites get it into  their heads to make trouble
because you’re getting too prosperous—what then? Dr. Bennett and all the
rest of the good white folks around here can’t help you!”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes, they can,” Kenneth observed with the same confident smile.
“Judge Stevenson and Roy Ewing and Mr. Baird at the Bank of Central City
and a lot others run this town and they aren’t going to let any decent
coloured man be bothered. Why, I’ll have a cinch around this part of
Georgia! There aren’t more than half a dozen coloured doctors in all
this part of the country who’ve had a decent medical education and
training. All they know is ladling out pills and fake panaceas. In a few
years I’ll be able to give up general practising and give all my time to
major surgery. I’ll handle pretty nearly everything in this part of the
State. And then you’ll see I’m right!”</p>
<p>“Have it your own way,” retorted Bob. “But I’m telling you again, you
haven’t been living down here for eight or nine years and you don’t
know. When all these Negroes were going North, some of these same ‘good
white folks’ you’re depending on started talking about ‘putting niggers
in their place’ when they couldn’t get servants and field hands. You’ll
find things a lot different from the way they were when you went up
North to school.”</p>
<p>“What’re you boys fussing about? What’s the trouble?”</p>
<p>Bob and Kenneth turned at the voice from the doorway behind them. It
was their mother. 
“Nothing, mamma, only Bob’s got a fit of the blues to-day.”</p>
<p>Mrs. Harper came in and looked from one to the other of her sons. She
was a buxom, pleasant-faced woman of fifty-odd years, her hair once
brown now flecked with grey. She wiped the perspiration from her
forehead with the corner of her apron, announcing meanwhile that supper
was ready. As he rose, Kenneth continued his explanation of their
conversation.</p>
<p>“Bob’s seeing things like a kid in the dark. He thinks I’ll not be
able to do the things I came back here to accomplish. Thinks the
Crackers won’t let me! I’m going to solve my own problem, do as much
good as I can, make as much money as I can! If every Negro in America
did the same thing, there wouldn’t be any race problem.”</p>
<p>Mrs. Harper took an arm of each of her sons and led them into the
dining-room where their sister Mamie was putting supper on the
table.</p>
<p>“You’re right, Kenneth,” Mrs. Harper remarked as she sat down at the
table. “Your father and I got along here together in Central City
without a bit of trouble for thirty-five years, and I reckon you can do
it too.”</p>
<p>“But, mamma,” Bob protested, “I’ve been telling Ken things are not
what they were when you and papa came along. Why—”</p>
<p>“Let’s forget the race problem for a while,” Kenneth interrupted.
“I’m too hungry and tired to talk about it now.”</p>
<p> “That’s right,” was
Mrs. Harper’s comment. “Draw your chairs up to the table. You’re not
goin’ to have any trouble here in town, Ken, and we’re mighty glad you
came back. Mrs. Amos was in this afternoon and she tells me they’re
having some trouble out near Ashland between the coloured sharecroppers
and their landlords, but that’ll blow overjust as it’s always done.”</p>
<p>“What’s the trouble out there?” asked Kenneth. He wasn’t much
interested, for he could hear Mamie, in the kitchen beyond, singing some
popular air to the accompaniment of chicken-frying.</p>
<p>“It’s a case where coloured farmers claim they can’t get fair
settlements from their landlords for their crops at the end of the
year,” explained his mother.</p>
<p>“Why don’t they hire a lawyer?” Kenneth asked, with little
interest.</p>
<p>“That shows you’ve forgotten all about things in the South,” said Bob
with mingled triumph and despair at his brother’s ignorance. “There
isn’t a white lawyer in Georgia who’d take a case like this. In the
first place, the courts would be against him because his client’s a
Negro, and in the second place, he’d have to buck this combination of
landlords, storekeepers, and bankers who are getting rich robbing
Negroes. If a white lawyer took a case of a Negro share-cropper, he’d
either sell out to the landlord or be scared to death before he ever got
to court. And as for a Negro lawyer,” here Bob laughed sardonically,
“he’d be run out of town by the Ku Klux  Klan or lynched almost before he took the
case!”</p>
<p>“Oh, I don’t know so much about that!” Kenneth replied. “There are
landlords, without doubt, who rob their tenants, but after all there are
only a few of them. And furthermore,” he declared as Mamie entered the
room with a platter of fried chicken in one hand and a plate of hot
biscuits in the other, “supper looks just a little bit more interesting
to me right now than landlords, tenants, or problems of any kind.”</p>
<p>Mamie divested herself of her apron and sat down to the table. She
was an attractive girl of twenty-two or twenty-three, more slender than
Bob, and about Kenneth’s height. Her hair was darker than that of either
of her brothers, was parted in the middle and brushed down hard on
either side. Though not a pretty girl, she had an air about her as
though she was happy because of the sheer joy of living. She had
graduated from Atlanta University two years before, and with two other
girls had been teaching the seven grades in the little ramshackle
building that served as a coloured school in the town. That hard work
had not as yet begun to tell on her. She seemed filled with buoyant good
health and blessed with a lively good nature. Yet she too was inclined
to spells of depression like Bob’s. She resembled him more nearly than
Kenneth. As has every comely coloured girl in towns of the South like
Central City, she had had many repulsive experiences when she had to
fight with might and main to ward off unwelcome attentions—both of the
men of her  own race and
of white men. Especially had this been true since the death of her
father. Often her face overclouded as she thought of them. She, like
Bob, felt always as though they were living on top of a volcano—and
never knew when it might erupt. …</p>
<p>The four sat at supper. Forgotten were problems other than the
immediate one of Kenneth’s in getting his practice under way. Eagerly
they talked of his plans, his prospects, his ambitions. Bob said nothing
until they began to discuss him and his plans for returning to school
the following fall, now that Kenneth was back to complete the settling
of the small details that remained in connection with Joe Harper’s
estate. …</p>
<p>It was a happy and reasonably prosperous, intelligent family
group—one that can be duplicated many, many times in the South.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER II
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">S</span><span class="smallcaps">ituated</span> in the heart of the farming section of
the State, with its fertile soil, its equable climate, its forests of
pine trees, Central City was one of the flourishing towns of South
Georgia. Its population was between eight and ten thousand, of which
some four thousand were Negroes. The wealth and prosperity of the town
depended not so much on the town itself as it did on the farmers of the
fertile lands surrounding it. To Central City they came on Saturday
afternoons to sell their cotton, their corn, their hogs and cows, and to
buy in turn sugar, cloth, coffee, farming-implements, shoes, and
amusement. It was divided into four nearly equal sections by the
intersection of the tracks of the Central of Georgia Railroad and of the
Georgia, Southern and Florida Railway. Drowsy, indolent during the first
six days of the week, Central City awoke on Saturday morning for “goin’t
town” day with its bustle and excitement and lively trade. Then the
broad dustiness of Lee Street was disturbed by the Fords and muddied
wagons of farmers, white and black. In the wagons were usually
splint-bottom chairs or boards stretched from side to side, occupied by
scrawny, lanky “po’ whites” with a swarm of children to match, clad in
single-piece garments, once  red in colour and now, through many washings
with lye soap, an indeterminate reddish brown. Or, if the driver was a
Negro, he generally was surrounded by just as many little black
offspring, clad also in greyish or reddish-brown garments, and
scrambling over the farm products being brought to town for sale or
exchange for the simple and few store products needed. And beside him
the usually buxom, ample-bodied wife, clad in her finest and most gaudy
clothing to celebrate the trip to town looked forward to eagerly all the
week.</p>
<p>Crowded were the streets with vehicles and the sidewalks with the
jostling, laughing, loudly talking throng of humans. After the noonday
whistle had blown signalling release to the hordes of whites working in
the cotton mill over beyond the tracks, the crowd was augmented
considerably, the new-comers made up of those who had deserted the
country districts, discouraged by the hard life of farming, by rainy and
unprofitable seasons, by the ravages of the boll weevil and of
landlords, both working dire distress on poor white and black alike.
Discouraged, they had come to “the city” to work at small wages in the
cotton mill.</p>
<p>All the trading done on these days did not take place over the
counters of the stores that lined Lee Street. In the dirty little
alleyways from off the main street, men with furtive eyes but bold ways
dispensed synthetic gin, “real” rye whisky, and more often “white mule,”
as the moonshine corn whisky is called. Bottles were tilted and held to
the mouth  a long time and
later the scene would be enlivened by furious but shortlived fights.
Guns, knives, all sorts of weapons appeared with miraculous speed—the
quarrel was settled, the wounded or killed removed, and the throng
forgot the incident in some new joyous and usually commonplace or sordid
adventure.</p>
<p>When darkness began to approach, the wagons and Fords, loaded with
merchandise for the next week, and with the children clutching sticky
and brightly coloured candies, began to rumble countrywards, and Central
City by nightfall had resumed its sleepy, indolent, and deserted
manner.</p>
<p>From the corner where Oglethorpe Avenue crossed Lee Street and where
stood the monument to the Confederate Dead, the business section
extended up Lee Street for three blocks. Here the street was dignified
with a narrow “park,” some twenty feet in width, which ran the length of
the business thoroughfare. Over beyond the monument lay the section of
Central City where lived the more well-to-do of its white inhabitants.
Georgia Avenue was here the realm of the socially elect. Shaded by elms,
it numbered several more or less pretentious homes of two stories, some
of brick, the majority of frame structure. Here were the homes of Roy
Ewing, president of the local Chamber of Commerce and owner of Ewing’s
General Merchandise Emporium; of George Baird, president of the Bank of
Central City; of Fred Griswold, occupying the same relation to Central
City’s other bank, the Smith County Farmers’ Bank; of  Ralph Minor, owner and manager of the Bon
Ton Store.</p>
<p>Here too were the wives of these men, busying themselves with their
household duties and the minor social life of the community. In the
morning they attended to the many details of housekeeping; in the
afternoon and early evening they sat on their front porches or visited
neighbours or went for a ride. Placid, uneventful, stupid lives they led
with no other interests than the petty affairs of a small and
unprogressive town.</p>
<p>The young girls of Central City usually in the afternoon dressed in
all their small-town finery and strolled down to Odell’s Drug Store
where the young men congregated. Having consumed a frothy soda or a
gummy, sweetish sundae, they went to the Idle Hour Moving Picture Palace
to worship at the celluloid shrine of a favourite film actor, usually of
the highly romantic type. Then the stroll homewards, always past the
Central City Hotel, a two-storied frame structure located at the corner
of Lee Street and Oglethorpe Avenue opposite the Confederate monument.
In front were arm-chairs, occupied in warm weather, which was nearly all
the year round, by travelling salesmen or other transients. Often a
sidelong glance and a fleeting, would-be-coy smile would cause one of
the chair-occupants to rise as casually as he could feign, yawn and
stretch, and with affected nonchalance stroll down Lee Street in the
wake of the smiling one. …</p>
<p>At the other end of Lee Street from the residential  section of the well-to-do
whites, past the business section of that main artery of the town, lay
that portion known generally as “Darktown.” Fringing it were several
better-than-the-average homes, neat, well painted, comfortable-looking,
fronted with smooth lawns and tidy, colourful flower-beds. It was one of
these at the corner of Lee and State Streets that the Harpers owned and
occupied.</p>
<p>After crossing State Street, an abrupt descent was taken by Lee
Street. Here lived in squalor and filth and abject poverty the poorer
class of Negroes. The streets were winding, unpaved lanes, veritable
seas and rivers of sticky, gummy, discouraging mud in rainy weather,
into which the wheels of vehicles sank to their hubs if the drivers of
those conveyances were indiscreet enough to drive through them. In
summer these eddying wallows of muck and filth and mud dry up and are
transformed into swirling storms of germ-laden dust when a vagrant wind
sweeps over them or a vehicle drives through them, choking the throats
of unlucky passers-by, and, to the despair of the dusky housewives,
flying through open windows. The houses that bordered these roads were
for the most part of three and four rooms, the exteriors unpainted or
whitewashed, the interiors gloomy and smelly. But few of them had
sanitary arrangements, and at the end of the little patch of ground that
was back of each of them, in which a few discouraged vegetables strove
to push their heads above the ground, there stood another unpainted
structure, small, known as “the privy.” In front there was  nearly always some attempt at
flower-cultivation, the tiny beds bordered with bottles, shells, and
bits of brightly coloured glass. The ugliness of the houses in many
instances was hidden in summer-time by vines and rambler roses that
covered the porches and sometimes the fronts of the houses.</p>
<p>Around these houses, in the streets, everywhere, there played a
seemingly innumerable horde of black and brown and yellow children,
noisy, quarrelsome, clad usually in one-piece dresses of the same
indeterminate shade of grey or red or brown that was seen on the country
children on Saturday. In front of many of the houses, there sat on sunny
days an old and bent man or ancient woman puffing the omnipresent
corn-cob pipe. …</p>
<p>A half-mile westward from “Darktown,” and separated from it by the
Central of Georgia Railroad tracks, stood the Central City Cotton
Spinning-Mill. Clustered around its ugly red-brick walls stood dwellings
that differed but little from those of “Darktown.” Here were the same
dingy, small, unsanitary, unbeautiful, and unpainted dwellings. Here
were the same muddy or dusty unpaved streets. Here were the same squalor
and poverty and filth and abject ignorance. There were but few
superficial or recognizable differences. One was that the children wore,
instead of the brown plumpness of the Negro children, a pale, emaciated,
consumptive air because of the long hours in the lint-laden confines of
the mills. The men were long, stooped, cadaverous-appearing. The women
were sallow, unattractive, sad-looking,  each usually with the end of a snuff-stick
protruding from her mouth. The children, when they played at all, did so
in listless, wearied, uninterested, and apathetic fashion. The houses
looked even more gaunt and bare than those in the quarter which housed
the poorer Negroes, for the tiny patches of ground that fronted the
houses here in “Factoryville” were but seldom planted with flowers. More
often it was trampled down until it became a hard, red-clay, sunbaked
expanse on which the children, and dogs as emaciated and forlorn,
sometimes played.</p>
<p>Here there was but one strong conviction, but one firm rock of faith
to which they clung—the inherent and carefully nurtured hatred of
“niggers” and a belief in their own infinite superiority over their
dark-skinned neighbours. Their gods were Tom Watson and Hoke Smith and
Tom Hardwick and other demagogic politicians and office-seekers who came
to them every two or four years and harangued them on the necessity of
their upholding white civilization by re-electing them to office. But
one appeal was needed—but one was used—and that one always successfully.
Meanwhile, their children left school and entered the mill to work the
few years that such a life gave them. And, in the meantime, the black
children they hated so-deprived by prejudice from working in the mills,
and pushed forward by often illiterate but always ambitious black
parents—went to school. …</p>
<p>This, in brief, was the Central City to which Kenneth had returned. A
typical Southern town—reasonably rich as wealth is measured in that
part of Georgia—rich in money and lands and cot—amazingly ignorant in
the finer things of life. Noisy, unreflective, their wants but few and
those easily satisfied. The men, self-made, with all that that
distinctly American term implies. The women concerned only with their
petty household affairs and more petty gossip and social intercourse.
But, beyond these, life was and is a closed book. Or, more, a book that
never was written or printed.</p>
<p>The companionship and inspiration of books was unknown. Music, even
with the omnipresent Victrola, meant only the latest bit of cheap jazz
or a Yiddish or Negro dialect song. Art, in its many forms was
considered solely for decadent, effete “furriners.” Hostility would have
met the woman of the town’s upper class who attempted to exhibit any
knowledge of art. Her friends would have felt that she was trying “to
put something over on them.” As for any man of the town, at best he
would have been considered a “little queer in the head,” at the worst
suspected of moral turpitude or perversion. But two releases from the
commonplace, monotonous life were left. The first, liquor. Bootlegging
throve. The woods around Central City were infested with “moonshine”
stills that seldom were still. The initiated drove out to certain lonely
spots, deposited under well-known trees a jug or other container with a
banknote stuck in its mouth. One then gave a certain whistle and walked
away. Soon there would come an answering signal. One went back to  the tree and found the money
gone but the container filled with a colourless or pale-yellow liquid. …
Or, the more affluent had it brought to them in town hidden under
wagon-loads of fodder or cotton.</p>
<p>The other and even more popular outlet of unfulfilled and suppressed
emotions was sex. Central City boasted it had no red-light district like
Macon and Savannah and Atlanta. That was true. All over the town were
protected domiciles housing slatternly women. To them went by circuitous
routes the merchants whose stores were on Lee Street. To them went the
gangs from the turpentine camps on their periodic pilgrimages to town on
pay-day. And a traveller on any of the roads leading from the town could
see, on warm evenings, automobiles standing with engines stilled and
lights dimmed on the side of the road. Down on Harris and Butler Streets
in “Darktown” were other houses. Here were coloured women who seemed
never to have to work. Here was seldom seen a coloured man. And the
children around these houses were usually lighter in colour than in
other parts of “Darktown.”</p>
<p>Negro fathers and mothers of comely daughters never allowed them to
go out unaccompanied after dark. There were too many dangers from men of
their own race. And even greater ones from men of the other race. There
had been too many disastrous consequences from relaxation of vigil by
certain bowed and heart-broken coloured parents. And they had no redress
at law. The laws of the State against intermarriage saw to it that there
should be none.  Central
City inhabitants knew all these things. But familiarity with them had
bred the belief that they did not exist—that is, they were thought a
natural part of the town’s armament against scandal. One soon grew used
to them and forgot them. The town was no worse than any other—far better
than most.</p>
<p>It was a rude shock to Kenneth when he began to see these things
through an entirely different pair of eyes than those with which he had
viewed them before he left Central City for the North. The sordidness,
the blatant vulgarity, the viciousness of it all—especially the houses
on Butler and Harris Streets—appalled and sickened him. Even more was he
disgusted by the complacent acceptance of the whole miserable business
by white and black alike. On two or three occasions he tentatively
mentioned it to a few of those he had known intimately years before.
Some of them laughed indulgently—others cautioned him to leave it alone.
Finding no response, he shrugged his shoulders and dismissed the whole
affair from his mind. “It was here long before I was born,” he said to
himself philosophically, “it’ll probably be here long after I’m dead,
and the best thing for me to do is to stick to my own business and let
other people’s morals alone.”</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER III
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">K</span><span class="smallcaps">enneth</span> came into contact with few others than
his own people during the first month after his return to Central City.
The first two weeks had been spent in getting his offices arranged with
the innumerable details of carpentering, plastering, painting, and
disposition of the equipment he had ordered in New York during the days
he had spent there on his return from France.</p>
<p>During the early months of 1917, when through every available means
propaganda was being used to whip into being America’s war spirit, one
of the most powerful arguments heard was that of the beneficial effect
army life would have on the men who entered the service. Newspapers and
magazines were filled with it, orators in church and theatre and hall
shouted it, every signboard thrust it into the faces of Americans.
Alluring pictures were painted of the growth, physical and mental, that
would certainly follow enlistment “to make the world safe for
democracy.”</p>
<p>To some of those who fought, such a change probably did come, but the
mental outlook of most of them was changed but little. The war was too
big a thing, too terrible and too searing a catastrophe, to be
adequately comprehended by the farmer boys, the  clerks, and the boys fresh from school who
chiefly made up the fighting forces. Their lives had been too largely
confined to the narrow ways to enable them to realize the immensity of
the event into which they had been so suddenly plunged. Their most vivid
memories were of “that damned second loot” or of <i>beaucoup vin
blanc</i> or, most frequently, of all-too-brief adventures with the
<i>mademoiselles</i>. With the end of the war and demobilization had
come the short periods of hero-worship and then the sudden forgetfulness
of those for whom they had fought. The old narrow life began again with
but occasional revolts against the monotony of it all, against the
blasting of the high hopes held when the war was being fought. Even
these spasmodic revolts eventually petered out in vague mutterings among
men like themselves who let their inward dissatisfaction dissipate in
thin air.</p>
<p>More deep-rooted was this revolt among Negro ex-service men. Many of
them entered the army, not so much because they were fired with the
desire to fight for an abstract thing like world democracy, but, because
they were of a race oppressed, they entertained very definite beliefs
that service in France would mean a more decent regime in America, when
the war was over, for themselves and all others who were classed as
Negroes. Many of them, consciously or subconsciously, had a spirit which
might have been expressed like this: “Yes, we’ll fight for democracy in
France, but when that’s over with we’re going to expect and we’re going
to get some of that  same
democracy for ourselves right here in America.” It was because of this
spirit and determination that they submitted to the rigid army
discipline to which was often added all the contumely that race
prejudice could heap upon them.</p>
<p>Kenneth was of that class which thought of these things in a more
detached, more abstract, more subconscious manner. During the days when,
stationed close to the line, he treated black men brought to the base
hospital with arms and legs torn away by exploding shells, with bodies
torn and mangled by shrapnel, or with flesh seared by mustard gas, he
had inwardly cursed the so-called civilization which not only permitted
but made such carnage necessary. But when the nightmare had ended, he
rapidly forgot the nausea he had felt, and plunged again into his
beloved work. More easily than he would have thought possible, he forgot
the months of discomfort and weariness and bloodshed. It came back to
him only in fitful memories as of some particularly horrible dream.</p>
<p>To Kenneth, when work grew wearisome or when memories would not down,
there came relaxation in literature, an opiate for which he would never
cease being grateful to Professor Fuller, his old teacher at Atlanta. It
was “Pop”. Fuller who, with his benign and paternal manner, his
adoration of the best of the world’s literature, had sown in Kenneth the
seed of that same love. He read and reread <i>Jean Christophe</i>,
finding in the adventures and particularly in the mental processes of
Rolland’s hero many  of
his own reactions towards life. He had read the plays of Bernard Shaw,
garnering here and there a morsel of truth though much of Shaw eluded
him. Theodore Dreiser’s gloominess and sex-obsession he liked though it
often repelled him; he admired the man for his honesty and disliked his
pessimism or what seemed to him a dolorous outlook on life. He loved the
colourful romances of Hergesheimer, considering them of little enduring
value but nevertheless admiring his descriptions of affluent life,
enjoying it vicariously. Willa Cather’s <i>My Antonia</i> he delighted
in because of its simplicity and power and beauty.</p>
<p>The works of D. H. Lawrence, Kenneth read with conflicting emotions.
Mystical, turgid, tortuous phrases, and meaning not always clear. Yet he
revelled in Lawrence’s clear insight into the bends and backwaters and
perplexing twistings of the stream of life. Kenneth liked best of all
foreign writers Knut Hamsun. He had read many times <i>Hunger, Growth of
the Soil</i>, and other novels of the Norwegian writer. He at times was
annoyed by their lack of plot, but more often he enjoyed them because
they had none, reflecting that life itself is never a smoothly turned
and finished work of art, its causes and effects, its tears and joys,
its loves and hates neatly dovetailing one into another as writers of
fiction would have it.</p>
<p>So too did he satisfy his love for the sea in the novels of
Conrad—the love so many have who are born and grow to manhood far from
the sea. Kenneth loved it
with an abiding and passionate love loved, yet feared it for its
relentless power and savagery—a love such as a man would have for an
alluring, yet tempestuous mistress of fiery and uncertain temper. In
Conrad’s romances he lived by proxy the life he would have liked had not
fear of the water and the circumstances of his life prevented it.
Flaubert, Zola, Maupassant he read and reread, finding in the struggles
of <i>Emma Bovary</i> and <i>Nana</i> and other heroines and heroes of
the French realists mental counterparts of some of the coloured men and
women of his acquaintance in their struggles against the restrictions of
stupid and crass and ignorant surroundings. The very dissimilarities of
environment and circumstance between his own acquaintances and the
characters in the novels he read, seemed to emphasize the narrowness of
his own life in the South. So does a bedridden invalid read with keen
delight the adventurous and rococo romances of Zane Grey or Jack
London.</p>
<p>But perhaps best of all he admired the writing of Du Bois—the fiery,
burning philippics of one of his own race against the proscriptions of
race prejudice. He read them with a curious sort of detachment—as being
something which touched him in a more or less remote way but not as a
factor in forming his own opinions as a Negro in a land where democracy
often stopped dead at the colour line.</p>
<p>It was in this that Kenneth’s attitude towards life was most clearly
shown. His was the more philosophic viewpoint on the race question, that
problem so  close to him.
The proscriptions which he and others of his race were forced to endure
were inconvenient, yet they were apparently a part of life, one of its
annoyances, a thing which had always been and probably would be for all
time to come. Therefore, he reasoned, why bother with it any more than
one was forced to by sheer necessity? Better it was for him if he
attended to his own individual problems, solved them to the best of his
ability and as circumstances would permit, and left to those who chose
to do it the agitation for the betterment of things in general. If he
solved his problems and every other Negro did the same, he often
thought, then the thing we call the race problem will be solved.
Besides, he reasoned, the whole thing is too big for one man to tackle
it, and if he does attack it, more than likely he will go down to defeat
in the attempt. And what would be gained? …</p>
<p>His office completed, Kenneth began the making of those contacts he
needed to secure the patients he knew were coming. In this his mother
and Mamie were of invaluable assistance. Everybody knew the Harpers. It
was a simple matter for Kenneth to renew acquaintances broken when he
had left for school in the North. He joined local lodges of the Grand
United Order of Heavenly Reapers and the Exalted Knights of Damon. The
affected mysteriousness of his initiation into these fraternal orders,
the secret grip, the passwords, the elaborately worded rituals, all of
which the other members took so seriously, amused him, but he went
through it all with an out  wardly solemn demeanour. He knew it was good
business to affiliate himself with these often absurd societies which
played so large a part in the lives of these simple and illiterate
coloured folk. Along with the strenuous emotionalism of their religion,
it served as an outlet for their naturally deep feelings. In spite of
the renewal of acquaintances, the careful campaign of winning confidence
in his ability as a physician, Kenneth found that the flood of patients
did not come as he had hoped. The coloured people of Central City had
had impressed upon them by three hundred years of slavery and that which
was called freedom after the Emancipation Proclamation was signed, that
no Negro doctor, however talented, was quite as good as a white one.
This slave mentality, Kenneth now realized, inbred upon generation after
generation of coloured folk, is the greatest handicap from which the
Negro suffers, destroying as it does that confidence in his own ability
which would enable him to meet without fear or apology the test of
modern competition.</p>
<p>Kenneth’s youthful appearance, too, militated against him. Though
twenty-nine years old, he looked not more than a mere twenty-four or
twenty-five. “He may know his stuff and be as smart as all outdoors,”
ran the usual verdict, “but I don’t want no boy treating me when I’m
sick.”</p>
<p>Perhaps the greatest factor contributing to the coloured folks’ lack
of confidence in physicians of their own race was the inefficiency of
Dr. Williams, the only coloured doctor in Central City prior to  Kenneth’s return. Dr. Williams
belonged to the old school and moved on the theory that when he
graduated some eighteen years before from a medical school in Alabama,
the development of medical knowledge had stopped. He fondly pictured
himself as being the most prominent personage of Central City’s Negro
colony, was pompous, bulbous-eyed, and exceedingly fond of long words,
especially of Latin derivation. He made it a rule of his life never to
use a word of one syllable if one of two or more would serve as well.
Active in fraternal order circles (he was a member of nine lodges),
class-leader in Central City’s largest Methodist church, arbiter supreme
of local affairs in general, he filled the rôle with what he imagined
was unsurpassable éclat. His idea of complimenting a hostess was
ostentatiously to loosen his belt along about the middle of dinner. Once
he had been introduced as the “black William Jennings Bryan,” believed
it thereafter, and thought it praise of a high order.</p>
<p>He was one of those who say on every possible occasion: “I am kept so
terribly busy I never have a minute to myself.” Like nine out of ten who
say it, Dr. Williams always repeated this stock phrase of those who
flatter themselves in this fashion—so necessary to those of small minds
who would be thought great—not because it was true, but to enhance his
pre-eminence in the eyes of his hearers—and in his own eyes as well.</p>
<p>He always wore coats which resembled morning coats, known in local
parlance as “Jim-swingers.”  He kept his hair straightened, wore it
brushed straight back from his forehead like highly polished steel
wires, and, with pomades and hair oils liberally applied, it glistened
like the patent leather shoes which adorned his ample feet.</p>
<p>His stout form filled the Ford in which he made his professional
calls, and it was a sight worth seeing as he majestically rolled through
the streets of the town bowing graciously and calling out loud greetings
to the acquaintances he espied by the way. Always his bows to white
people were twice as low and obsequious as to those of darker skin.
Until Kenneth returned, Dr. Williams had had his own way in Central
City. Through his fraternal and church connections and lack of
competition, he had made a little money, much of it through his position
as medical examiner for the lodges to which he belonged. As long as he
treated minor ailments—cuts, colic, childbirths, and the like he had
little trouble. But when more serious maladies attacked them, the
coloured population sent for the old white physician, Dr. Bennett,
instead of for Dr. Williams.</p>
<p>The great amount of time at his disposal irritated Kenneth. He was
like a spirited horse, champing at the bit, eager to be off. The
patronizing air of his people nettled him—caused him to reflect somewhat
bitterly that “a prophet is not without honour save in his own country.”
And when one has not the gift of prophecy to foretell, or of
clairvoyance to see, what the future holds in the way of success, one is
not likely to develop a philosophic calm which enables him to await the coming of long-desired
results. He was seated one day in his office reading when his mother
entered. Closing his book, he asked the reason for her frown.</p>
<p>“You remember Mrs. Bradley—Mrs. Emma Bradley down on Ashley
Street-don’t you, Kenneth?” Without waiting for a reply, Mrs. Harper
went on: “Well, she’s mighty sick. Jim Bradley has had Dr. Bennett in to
see what’s the matter with her but he don’t seem to do her much
good.”</p>
<p>Kenneth remembered Mrs. Bradley well indeed. The most talkative woman
in Central City. It was she who had come to his mother with a long face
and dolorous manner when he as a youngster had misbehaved in church. He
had learned instinctively to connect Mrs. Bradley’s visits with
excursions to the little back room accompanied by his mother and a
switch cut from the peach-tree in the back yard—a sort of natural cause
and effect. Visions of those days rose in his mind and he imagined he
could feel the sting of those switches on his legs now.</p>
<p>“What seems to be the trouble with her?” he asked.</p>
<p>“It’s some sort of stomach-trouble—she’s got an awful pain in her
side. She says it can’t be her appendix because she had that removed up
to Atlanta when she was operated on there for a tumour nearly four years
ago. Dr. Bennett gave her some medicine but it doesn’t help here any.
Won’t you run down there to see her?”</p>
<p>“I can’t, mamma, until I am called in professionally. Dr. Bennett
won’t like it. It isn’t ethical.  Besides, didn’t Mrs. Bradley say when I came
back that she didn’t want any coloured doctor fooling with her?”</p>
<p>“Yes, she did, but you mustn’t mind that. Just run in to see her as a
social call.”</p>
<p>Kenneth rose and instinctively took up his bag. Remembering, he put
it down, put on his hat, kissed his mother, and walked down to
Mrs. Bradley’s. Outside the gate stood Dr. Bennett’s mud-splashed buggy,
sagging on one side through years of service in carrying its owner’s
great bulk. Between the shafts stood the old bay horse, its head hung
dejectedly as though asleep, which Central City always connected with
its driver.</p>
<p>Entering the gate held by one hinge, Kenneth made his way to the
little three-room unpainted house which served as home for the Bradleys
and their six children. On knocking, the door was opened by Dr. Bennett,
who apparently was just leaving. He stood there, his hat on, stained by
many storms, its black felt turning a greenish brown through years of
service and countless rides through the red dust of the roads leading
out of Central City. Dr. Bennett himself was large and flabby. His
clothes hung on him in haphazard fashion and looked as though they had
never been subjected to the indignity of a tailor’s iron. A Sherlock
Holmes, or even one less gifted, could read on his vest with little
difficulty those things which its wearer had eaten for many meals past.
Dr. Bennett’s face was red through exposure to many suns, and covered
with the bristle of a three days’  growth of beard. Small eyes set close
together, they belied a bluff good humour which Dr. Bennett could easily
assume when there was occasion for it. The corners of the mouth were
stained a deep brown where tobacco juice had run down the folds of the
flesh.</p>
<p>Behind him stood Jim Bradley with worried face, his ashy black skin
showing the effects of remaining all night by the bedside of his
wife.</p>
<p>Dr. Bennett looked at Kenneth inquiringly.</p>
<p>“Don’t you remember me, Dr. Bennett? I’m Kenneth Harper.”</p>
<p>“Bless my soul, so it is. How’re you, Ken? Le’s see it’s been nigh on
to eight years since you went No’th, ain’t it? Heard you was back in
town. Hear you goin’ to practise here. Come ‘round to see me some time.
Right glad you’re here. I’ll be kinder glad to get somebody to help me
treat these niggers for colic or when they get carved up in a crap game.
Hope you ain’t got none of them No’then ideas ’bout social equality
while you was up there. Jus’ do like your daddy did, and you’ll get
along all right down here. These niggers who went over to France and ran
around with them Frenchwomen been causin’ a lot of trouble ‘round here,
kickin’ up a rumpus, and talkin’ ‘bout votin’ and ridin’ in the same car
with white folks. But don’t you let them get you mixed up in it, ‘cause
there’ll be trouble sho’s you born if they don’t shut up and git to
work. Jus’ do like your daddy did, and you’ll do a lot to keep the white
folks’ friendship.”</p>
<p> Dr. Bennett poured
forth all this gratuitous advice between asthmatic wheezes without
waiting for Kenneth to reply. He then turned to Jim Bradley with a
parting word of advice.</p>
<p>“Jim, keep that hot iron on Emma’s stomach and give her those pills
every hour. ‘Tain’t nothin’ but the belly-ache. She’ll be all right in
an hour or two.”</p>
<p>Turning without another word, he half ambled, half shuffled out to
his buggy, pulled himself up into it with more puffing and wheezing, and
drove away. Jim Bradley took Kenneth’s arm and led him back on to the
little porch, closing the door behind him.</p>
<p>“I’m pow’ful glad t’ see you, Ken. My, but you done growed sence you
went up No’th! Befo’ you go in dar, I want t’ tell you somethin’. Emma’s
been right po’ly fuh two days. Her stomach’s swelled up right sma’t and
she’s been hollering all night. Dis mawning she don’t seem jus’ right in
de haid. I tol her I was gwine to ast you to come see her, but she said
she didn’t want no young nigger doctah botherin’ with her. But don’t you
min’ her. I wants you to tell me what to do.”</p>
<p>Kenneth smiled.</p>
<p>“I’ll do what I can for her, Jim. But what about Dr. Bennett?”</p>
<p>“Dat’s a’ right. He give her some med’cine but it ain’t done her no
good. She’s too good a woman fuh me to lose her, even if she do talk a
li’l’ too much. You make out like you jus’ drap in to pass the time o’
day with her.”</p>
<p> Kenneth entered the
dark and ill-smelling room. Opposite the door a fire smouldered in the
fire-place, giving fitful spurts of flame that illumined the room and
then died down again. There was no grate, the pieces of wood resting on
crude andirons, blackened by the smoke of many fires. Over the mantel
there hung a cheap charcoal reproduction of Jim and Emma in their
wedding-clothes, made by some local “artist” from an old photograph. One
or two nondescript chairs worn shiny through years of use stood before
the fire. In one corner stood a dresser on which were various bottles of
medicine and of “Madame Walker’s Hair Straightener.” On the floor a rug,
worn through in spots and patched with fragments of other rugs all
apparently of different colours, covered the space in front of the bed.
The rest of the floor was bare and showed evidences of a recent vigorous
scrubbing. The one window was closed tightly and covered over with a
cracked shade, long since divorced from its roller, tacked to the upper
ledge of the window.</p>
<p>On the bed Mrs. Bradley was rolling and tossing in great pain. Her
eyes opened slightly when Kenneth approached the bed and closed again
immediately as a new spasm of pain passed through her body. She moaned
piteously and held her hands on her side, pressing down hard one hand
over the other.</p>
<p>At a sign from Jim, Kenneth started to take her pulse.</p>
<p>“Go way from here and leave me ‘lone! Oh,  Lawdy, why is I suff’rin’ this way? I jus’
wish I was daid! Oh-oh-oh!”</p>
<p>This last as she writhed in agony. Kenneth drew back the covers,
examined Mrs. Bradley’s abdomen, took her pulse. Every sign pointed to
an attack of acute appendicitis. He informed Jim of his diagnosis.</p>
<p>“But, Doc, it ain’t dat trouble, ’cause Emma says dat was taken out a
long time ago.”</p>
<p>“I can’t help what she says. She’s got appendicitis. You go get
Dr. Bennett and tell him your wife has got to be operated on right away
or she is going to die. Get a move on you now! If it was my case, I
would operate within an hour. Stop by my house and tell Bob to bring me
an ice bag as quick as he can.”</p>
<p>Jim hurried away to catch Dr. Bennett. Kenneth meanwhile did what he
could to relieve Mrs. Bradley’s suffering. In a few minutes Bob came
with the ice bag. Then Jim returned with his face even more doleful than
it had been when Kenneth had told him how sick his wife was.</p>
<p>“Doc Bennett says he don’t care what you do. He got kinder mad when I
told him you said it was ‘pendicitis, and tol’ me dat if I couldn’t take
his word, he wouldn’t have anything mo’ to do with Emma. He seemed
kinder mad ‘cause you said it was mo’ than a stomach-ache. Said he
wa’n’t goin’ to let no young nigger doctor tell him his bus’ness. So,
Doc, you’ll have t’ do what you thinks bes’.”</p>
<p>“All right, I’ll do it. First thing, I’m going to  move your wife over to my office. We can put
her up in the spare room. Bob will drive her over in the car. Get
something around her and you’d better come on over with her. I’ll get
Dr. Williams to help me.”</p>
<p>Kenneth was jubilant at securing his first surgical case since his
return to Central City, though his pleasure was tinged with doubt as to
the ethics of the manner in which it had come to him. He did not let
that worry him very long, however, but began his preparations for the
operation.</p>
<p>First he telephoned to Mrs. Johnson, who, before she married and
settled down in Central City, had been a trained nurse at a coloured
hospital at Atlanta. She hurried over at once. Neat, quiet, and
efficient, she took charge immediately of preparations, sterilizing the
array of shiny instruments, preparing wads of absorbent cotton,
arranging bandages and catgut and hæmostatics.</p>
<p>Kenneth left all this to Mrs. Johnson, for he knew in her hands it
would be well done. He telephoned to Dr. Williams to ask that he give
the anæsthesia. In his excitement Kenneth neglected to put in his voice
the note of asking a great and unusual favour of Dr. Williams. That
eminent physician, eminent in his own eyes, cleared his throat several
times before replying, while Kenneth waited at the other end of the
line. He realized his absolute dependence on Dr. Williams, for he knew
no white doctor would assist a Negro surgeon or even operate with a
coloured assistant. There was none other in Central  City who could give the ether to
Mrs. Bradley. It made him furious that Dr. Williams should hesitate so
long. At the same time, he knew he must restrain the hot and burning
words that he would have used. The pompous one hinted of the pressure of
his own work—work that would keep him busy all day.</p>
<p>Into his words he injected the note of affront at being asked—he, the
coloured physician of Central City—to assist a younger man. Especially
on that man’s first case. Kenneth swallowed his anger and pride, and
pleaded with Dr. Williams at least to come over. Finally, the older
physician agreed in a condescending manner to do so.</p>
<p>Hurrying back to his office, Kenneth found Mrs. Bradley arranged on
the table ready for the operation. Examining her, he found she was in
delirium, her eyes glazed, her abdomen hard and distended, and she had a
temperature of 105 degrees. He hastily sterilized his hands and put on
his gown and cap. As he finished his preparations, Dr. Williams in
leisurely manner strolled into the room with a benevolent and
patronizing “Howdy, Kenneth, my boy. I won’t be able to help you out
after all. I’ve got to see some patients of my own.”</p>
<p>He emphasized “my own,” for he had heard of the manner by which
Kenneth had obtained the case of Mrs. Bradley Kenneth, pale with anger,
excited over his first real case in Central City, stared at Dr. Williams
in amazement at his words.</p>
<p>“But, Dr. Williams, you can’t do that! Mrs. Bradley here is
dying!”</p>
<p> The older doctor
looked around patronizingly at the circle of anxious faces. Jim Bradley,
his face lined and seamed with toil, the lines deepened in distress at
the agony of his wife and the imminence of losing her, gazed at him with
dumb pleading in his eyes, pleading without spoken words with the look
of an old, faithful dog beseeching its master. Bob looked with a
malevolent glare at his pompous sleekness, as though he would like to
spring upon him.</p>
<p>Mrs. Johnson plainly showed her contempt of such callousness on the
part of one who bore the title, however poorly, of physician. In
Kenneth’s eyes was a commingling of eagerness and rage and bitterness
and anxiety. On Emma Bradley’s face there was nothing but the pain and
agony of her delirious ravings. Dr. Williams seemed to enjoy thoroughly
his little moment of triumph. He delayed speaking in order that it might
be prolonged as much as possible. The silence was broken by Jim
Bradley.</p>
<p>“Doc, won’t you please he’p?” he pleaded. “She’s all I got!”</p>
<p>Kenneth could remain silent no longer. He longed to punch that fat
face and erase from it the supercilious smirk that adorned it.</p>
<p>“Dr. Williams,” he began with cold hatred in his voice, “either you
are going to give this anæsthesia or else I’m going to go into every
church in Central City and tell exactly what you’ve done here
today.”</p>
<p>Dr. Williams turned angrily on Kenneth.</p>
<p>“Young man, I don’t allow anybody to talk to me  like that-least of all, a young
whippersnapper just out of school …” he shouted.</p>
<p>By this time Kenneth’s patience was at an end. He seized the lapels
of the other doctor’s coat in one hand and thrust his clenched fist
under the nose of the now thoroughly alarmed Dr. Williams.</p>
<p>“Are you going to help—or aren’t you?” he demanded.</p>
<p>The situation was becoming too uncomfortable for the older man. He
could stand Kenneth’s opposition but not the ridicule which would
inevitably follow the spreading of the news that he had been beaten up
and made ridiculous by Kenneth. He swallowed—a look of indecision passed
over his face as he visibly wondered if Kenneth really dared hit
him—followed by a look of fear as Kenneth drew back his fist as though
to strike. Discretion seemed the better course to pursue he could wait
until a later and more propitious date for his revenge—he agreed to
help. A look of relief came over Jim Bradley’s face. A grin covered
Bob’s as he saw his brother showing at last some signs of fighting
spirit. Without further words Kenneth prepared to operate. …</p>
<p>The patient under the ether, Kenneth with sure, deft strokes made an
incision and rapidly removed the appendix. Ten—twelve—fifteen minutes,
and the work was done. He found Mrs. Bradley’s peritoneum badly
inflamed, the appendix swollen and about to burst. A few hours’ delay
and it would have been too late. …</p>
<p>The next morning Mrs. Bradley’s temperature had  gone down to normal. Two weeks later she was
sufficiently recovered to be removed to her home. Three weeks later she
was on her feet again. Then Kenneth for the first time in his life had
no fault to find with the vigour with which Mrs. Bradley could use her
tongue. Glorying as only such a woman can in her temporary fame at
escape from death by so narrow a margin, she went up and down the
streets of the town telling how Kenneth had saved her life. With each
telling of the story it took on more embellishments until eventually the
simple operation ranked in importance in her mind with the first
sewing-up of the human heart.</p>
<p>Kenneth found his practice growing. His days were filled with his
work. One man viewed his growing practice with bitterness. It was
Dr. Williams, resentful of the small figure he had cut in the episode in
Kenneth’s office, which had become known all over Central City. Of a
petty and vindictive nature, he bided his time until he could force
atonement from the upstart who had so presumptuously insulted and
belittled him, the Beau Brummel, the leading physician, the prominent
coloured citizen. But Kenneth, if he knew of the hatred in the man’s
heart, was supremely oblivious of it.</p>
<p>The morning after his operation on Mrs. Bradley, he added another to
the list of those who did not wish him well. He had taken the bottle of
alcohol containing Mrs. Bradley’s appendix to Dr. Bennett to show that
worthy that he had been right, after all, in his diagnosis. He found him
seated in his office, 
Dr. Bennett, with little apparent interest, glanced at the bottle.</p>
<p>“Humph!” he ejaculated, aiming at the cuspidor and letting fly a thin
stream of tobacco juice which accurately met its mark. “You never can
tell what’s wrong with a nigger anyhow. They ain’t got nacheral diseases
like white folks. A hoss doctor can treat ’em better’n one that treats
humans. I always said that a nigger’s more animal than human. …”</p>
<p>Kenneth had been eager to discuss the case of Mrs. Bradley with his
fellow practitioner. He had not even been asked to sit down by
Dr. Bennett. He realized for the first time that in spite of the
superiority of his medical training to that of Dr. Bennett’s, the latter
did not recognize him as a qualified physician, but only as a “nigger
doctor.” Making some excuse, he left the house. Dr. Bennett turned back
to the local paper he had been reading when Kenneth entered, took a
fresh chew of tobacco from the plug in his hip pocket, grunted, and
remarked: “A damned nigger telling me I don’t know medicine!”</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER IV
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">T</span><span class="smallcaps">wo</span> months passed by. Kenneth had begun to
secure more patients than he could very well handle. Already he was kept
busier than Dr. Williams though there was enough practice for both of
them. Kenneth soon began to tire of treating minor ailments and longed
to reach the time when he could give up his general practice and devote
his time to surgery. Except for the delivery of the babies that came
with amazing rapidity in the community, he did little else than treat
colic, minor cuts, children’s diseases, with an occasional case of
tuberculosis. More frequently he treated for venereal diseases, though
this latter was even more distasteful to him than general practice while
at the same time more remunerative.</p>
<p>A new source of practice and revenue began gradually to grow. The
main entrance to his office was on Lee Street. This door was some fifty
feet back from Lee Street, and the overhanging branches of the elms cut
off completely the light from the street lamp at the corner. One night,
as he sat reading in his office, there came a knock at his door. Opening
it, he found standing there Roy Ewing. Ewing had inherited the general
merchandise store bearing his name from his father, was a deacon in the
largest  Baptist Church in
Central City, was president of the Central City Chamber of Commerce, and
was regarded as a leading citizen.</p>
<p>Kenneth gazed at his caller in some surprise.</p>
<p>“Hello, Ken. Anybody around?”</p>
<p>On being assured that he was alone, Ewing entered, brushing by
Kenneth to get out of the glare of the light. Kenneth followed him into
the office, meanwhile asking his caller what he could do for him.</p>
<p>“Ken, I’ve got a little job I want you to do for me. I’m in a little
trouble. Went up to Macon last month with Bill Jackson, and we had a
little fun. I guess I took too much liquor. We went by a place Bill knew
about where there were some girls. I took a fancy to a little girl from
Atlanta who told me she had slipped away from home and her folks thought
she was visiting her cousins at Forsyth. Anyhow, I thought everything
was all right, but I’m in a bad way and I want you to treat me. I can’t
go to Dr. Bennett ’cause I don’t want him to know about it. I’ll take
care of you all right, and if you get me fixed up I’ll pay you
well.”</p>
<p>Kenneth looked at him in amazement. Roy Ewing, acknowledged leader of
the “superior race”! He knew too much of the ways of the South, however,
to make any comment or let too much of what was going on in his mind
show on his face. He gave the treatment required. That was Kenneth’s
introduction to one part of the work of a coloured physician  in the South. Many phases of
life that he as a youth had never known about or, before his larger
experience in the North and in France, had passed by him unnoticed, he
now had brought to his attention. This was one of them. He began to see
more clearly that his was going to be a difficult course to pursue. He
determined anew that as far as possible he would keep to his own affairs
and meddle not at all with the life about him.</p>
<p>When Ewing had gone, Kenneth returned to his reading. Hardly had he
started again when Bob came in.</p>
<p>“Can you stop for a few minutes, Ken? I want to talk with you.”</p>
<p>With a look of regret at his book, Kenneth settled back and prepared
to listen.</p>
<p>“What world problem have you got on your mind now, Bob?”</p>
<p>“Don’t start to kidding me, Ken. I don’t see how you can shut your
eyes to how coloured people are being treated here.”</p>
<p>“What’s wrong? Everything seems to me to be getting along as well as
can be expected.”</p>
<p>“That’s because you don’t go out of the house unless you are hurrying
to give somebody a pill or a dose of medicine. To-day I came by the
school to get Mamie and bring her home. You ought to see the dump they
call a school building. It’s a dirty old building that looks like it’ll
fall down any time a hard wind comes along. All that’s inside is a  rickety table, and some hard
benches with no desks, and when it rains they have to send the children
home, as the water stands two or three inches deep on the floor. Outside
of Mamie they haven’t one teacher who’s gone any higher than the sixth
or seventh grade—they have to take anybody who is willing to work for
the twelve dollars a month they pay coloured teachers.”</p>
<p>Bob’s face had on it the look of discontent and resentment that was
almost growing chronic.</p>
<p>“Well, what can we do about it? I’m afraid you’re getting to be a
regular Atlas, trying to carry all the burdens of the world on your
shoulders. I know things aren’t all they ought to be, but you and I
can’t solve the problems. The race problem will be here long after we’re
dead and gone.”</p>
<p>“Oh, for goodness’ sake, shut up that preachy tone of long-suffering
patience, will you?—and forget your own little interests for a while. I
know you think I’m silly to let these things worry me. But the reason
why things are as bad as they are is just because the majority of
Negroes are like you—always dodging anything that may make them
unpopular with white folks. And that isn’t all. There’s a gang of white
boys that hang around Ewing’s Store that meddle with every coloured girl
that goes by. I was in the store to-day when Minnie Baxter passed by on
her way to the post office, and that dirty little Jim Archer said
something that made me boil all over. And it didn’t help any to know
that if I had said a word to him, there would have been a fight,  and I would have been beaten
half to death if I hadn’t been killed.”</p>
<p>“Yes, I’ve seen that, too. What we ought to do is to try and keep
these girls off of Lee Street, unless someone is with them. If we
weren’t living in the South, we might do something. But here we are, and
as long as we stay here, we’ve got to swallow a lot of these things and
stay to ourselves.”</p>
<p>“But, Ken, it isn’t always convenient for someone to go downtown with
them. I’ll tell you what let’s do. Let’s get the better class of
coloured people together like Reverend Wilson, Mr. Graham, Mr. Adams,
and some others, and form a Coloured Protective League here in Central
City. We can then take up these cases and see if something can’t be done
to remedy them.”</p>
<p>Bob leaned forward in his eagerness to impress Kenneth with his
idea.</p>
<p>“You see, if any one or two of us takes up a case we are marked men.
But if there are two or three hundred of us they can’t take it out on
all of us.”</p>
<p>“That’s true. But what about the effect on the white people whose
actions you want to check? If Negroes start organizing for any purpose
whatever, there’ll always be folks who’ll declare they are planning to
start some trouble. No, I don’t think we ought to do anything just now.
I tell you what I’ll do. The next time I see Roy Ewing, I’ll speak to
him and ask him to stop those fellows from annoying our girls, The
fellows can take care of themselves.”</p>
<p> Bob rose and shrugged
his shoulders and said nothing more. Kenneth after a minute or two
returned to his book.</p>
<p>Nothing further was said on the subject for several days. When
Mr. Ewing called the following week, Kenneth brought the matter up, and
told him what Bob had said about the boys in front of Ewing’s store.</p>
<p>“I’ve seen them doing it, Ken, and I spoke to them only to-day about
it. But you know, boys will be boys, and they haven’t done any harm to
the girls. Their talk is a little rough at times, but as long as it
stops there, I don’t see why anybody should object.”</p>
<p>“But, Mr. Ewing, Bob tells me that they say some pretty raw things.
Suppose one of them said the same things to Mrs. Ewing, how would you
feel then?”</p>
<p>Ewing flushed.</p>
<p>“That’s different. Mrs. Ewing is a white woman.”</p>
<p>“But can’t you see that we feel towards our women just as you do
towards yours? If one of those fellows ever spoke to my sister, there’s
be trouble, and the Lord knows I want to get along with all the people
here, if I can. If this thing called democracy that I helped fight for
is worth anything at all, it ought to mean that we coloured people
should be protected like anybody else.”</p>
<p>Mr. Ewing looked at Kenneth sharply.</p>
<p>“I know that things aren’t altogether as they ought to be. It’s
pretty tough on fellows like you, Ken,  who have had an education. While you were
away, a bunch of these mill hands ’cross the tracks got Jerry Bird, a
nigger that’d been working for me nearly five years. He came here from
down the country some place after you left for up North. Jerry was as
steady a fellow as I’ve ever seen—as honest as the day was long. I
trusted Jerry anywhere, lots quicker than I would’ve some of these white
people ’round here. He had a black skin but his heart was white. One
night Jerry was over to my house helping Mrs. Ewing until nearly ten
o’clock. On his way home this bunch of roughnecks from “Factoryville”
stopped him while they were looking for a nigger that’d scared a white
girl. When Jerry got scared and started to run, they took out after him
and strung him up to a tree. And he wasn’t any more guilty of touching
that white girl than you or me.”</p>
<p>“What did you do about it?” asked Bob.</p>
<p>“Nothing. Suppose I had kicked up a ruckus about it. They found out
afterwards that the girl hadn’t been bothered at all. But just suppose I
had gone and cussed out the fellows who did the lynching. Most of them
trade at my store. Or if they don’t, a lot of their friends do. They’d
have taken their trade to some other store and I’d ‘a’ gained nothing
for my trouble.”</p>
<p>“But surely you don’t believe that lynching ever helps, do you?”</p>
<p>“Yes and no. Lynching never bothers folks like you. Why, your daddy
was one of the most respected folks in this town. But lynching does
keep some of these young nigger bucks in check.”</p>
<p>“Does it? It seems to me that there isn’t much less so-called rape
around here or anywhere else in the South, even after forty years of
lynching. Mr. Ewing, why don’t you and the other decent white people
here come out against lynching?”</p>
<p>“Who? Me? Never!” Ewing looked his amazement at the suggestion. “Why,
it would ruin my business, my wife would begin to be dropped by all the
other folks of the town, and it wouldn’t be long before they’d begin
calling me a ‘nigger-lover.’ No, sir-ee! I’ll just let things rock along
and let well enough alone.”</p>
<p>“Mr. Ewing, if fifty men like you in this town banded together and
came out flat-footedly against lynching, there are lots more who would
join you gladly.”</p>
<p>“That may be true,” Ewing answered doubtfully. “But then again it
mightn’t. Let’s see who might be some of the fifty. There’s George
Baird, he’s president of the Bank of Central City, and Fred Griswold,
president of the Smith County Farmers’ Bank. You can count them out
because they’d be afraid of losing their depositors. Then there’s Ralph
Minor who owns the Bon Ton Store. He’s out for the same reason that I
am. Then there’s Nat Phelps, who runs the Central City Dispatch. He has
a hard enough time as it is. If he lost a couple of hundred subscribers,
he’d have to close up shop. And so it goes.”</p>
<p> “What about the
preachers? It doesn’t seem much of a religion they’re preaching if the
commandment, ‘Thou shalt not kill,’ doesn’t form part of their
creed.”</p>
<p>“Oh, you needn’t look for nothing much from them. Three years ago old
Reverend Adams down to the First Methodist took it into his head he was
going to tackle something easy—nothing like the race problem. He started
in to wipe out the bootleggers ’round here, thinking he could get a lot
of support. But he didn’t, because most of the folks he figgered on
lining up with him were regular customers of the fellows he was after.”
Ewing chuckled at the memory of the crusade that had died “aborning.”
“When the next quarterly conference was held, they elected a new pastor
for the First Methodist. No, Ken, it ain’t so easy as it looks. You’re
asking me to do something that not a Southern white man has done since
the Civil War⸺”</p>
<p>Rising, he walked towards the door and remarked:</p>
<p>“My advice to you is to stay away from any talk like this with
anybody else. There probably ain’t another man in town who would’ve
talked to you like this, and if the boys in the Ku Klux Klan knew I had
been running along like this with a coloured man, I don’t know what’d
happen to me. See you later. So long!”</p>
<p>Kenneth walked up and down the room with his hands stuffed deep into
his pockets, his thoughts rushing through his head in helter-skelter
fashion. He was suddenly conscious of a feeling that he  had been thrust into a tiny
boat and forced to embark on a limitless sea, with neither compass nor
chart nor sun nor moon to guide him. Would he arrive? Or would he go
down in some squall which arose from he knew not where or when? The
whole situation seemed so vast, so sinister, so monstrous, that he
shuddered involuntarily, as he had done as a child when left alone in a
dark room at night. Religion, which had been the guide and stay of his
father in like circumstances, offered him no solace. He thought with a
faint smile of the institution known as the Church. What was it? A vast
money machine, interested in rallies and pastors’ days and schemes to
milk more dollars from its communicants. In preparing people to die. He
wasn’t interested in what was going to happen to him after death. What
he wanted was some guide and comfort in his present problems. No,
religion and the Church as it was now constituted wasn’t the answer.
What was? He could not give it.</p>
<p>“Here I am,” he soliloquized, “with the best education money can buy.
And yet Roy Ewing, who hasn’t been any further than high school, tells
me I’d better submit to all this without protest. Yet he stands for the
best there is here in Central City, and I suppose he represents the most
liberal thought of the South. How’s it all going to end? Even a rat will
fight when he’s cornered, and these coloured people aren’t going to
stand for these things all the time. What can I do? God, there isn’t
anything—anything I can do? Bob is right! Something  must be done, but what is it? I reckon these
white folks must be blind—or else they figure on leaving whatever
solution there may be to their children, hoping the storm doesn’t break
while they are liv. ing. No! That isn’t it. They think because they’ve
been able to get away with it thus far, they’ll always be able to get
away with it. Oh, God, I’m helpless! I’m helpless!”</p>
<p>Kenneth had begun to comprehend the delicate position a Negro always
occupies in places like Central City—in fact, throughout the South. So
little had he come into contact with the perplexities of the race
question before he went away to school, he had seen little of the
windings and turnings, the tortuous paths the Negro must follow to avoid
giving offence to the dominant white sentiment. As he saw each day more
and more of the evasions, the repressions, the choking back of natural
impulses the Negro practised to avoid trouble, Kenneth often thought of
the coloured man as a chip of wood floating on the surface of a choppy
sea, tossed this way and that by every wind that blew upon the waters.
He must of necessity be constantly on his guard when talking with his
white neighbours, or with any white men in the South, to keep from
uttering some word, some phrase which, like a seed dropped and
forgotten, lies fallow for a time in the brain of the one to whom he
talks, but later blossoms forth into that noxious death-dealing plant
which is the mob. Innocent enough of guile or malice that word may be,
yet he must be careful lest it be distorted and magnified  until it can be the cause of
violence to himself and his people. Often—very often—it is true that no
evil follows. Yet the possibility that it may come must always be
considered. But one factor is fixed and immutable the more intelligent
and prosperous the Negro and the more ignorant and poor the white man,
the graver the danger, for in the mind of the latter are jealousy and
ignorance and stupidity and abject fear of the educated and successful
Negro.</p>
<p>His talk with Ewing had crystallized the thoughts, half developed,
which his observations since his return had planted in his mind. Kenneth
began to see how involved the whole question really was, he was seeing
dim paths of expediency and opportunism he would be forced to tread if
he expected to reach the goal he had set for himself. Already he found
one of his pet ideas to be of doubtful value the theory he had had that
success would give a Negro immunity from persecution. Like a scroll
slowly unwinding before his eyes, Kenneth saw, as yet only partially,
that instead of freeing him from danger of the mob, too great prosperity
would make him and every other Negro outstanding targets of the wrath
and envy of the poorer whites—that jealousy which “is cruel as the
grave.” Oh, well, he reflected, others had avoided trouble and so could
he. He would have to be exceedingly careful to avoid too great display,
and at the same time cultivate the goodwill of those men like Roy Ewing
and Judge Stevenson who would stand by him if there was need.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER V
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">K</span><span class="smallcaps">enneth</span> was roused by a light tap upon the door.
Opening it, Mamie stood on the threshold. Inquiring whether Kenneth had
finished his work, and on being told he had, she entered. “Kenneth, why
do you spend all your time here in the office? Don’t you think mamma and
I want to talk with you occasionally?”</p>
<p>Mamie seated herself on the arm of Kenneth’s chair.</p>
<p>“Seems like you’re becoming a regular hermit since you’ve been back.
Come on in the parlour—Jane Phillips is in there and she wants to see
you. Remember her?”</p>
<p>Kenneth smiled. “Remember Jane Phillips? Of course I do. Scrawny
little thing—running all to legs and arms. She was a homely little brat,
wasn’t she?”</p>
<p>It was now Mamie’s turn to smile.</p>
<p>“I’m going to tell her what you said,” she threatened. “She’s lots
different from the girl you remember.”</p>
<p>They went into the parlour.</p>
<p>Jane Phillips stood by the piano. She turned as Kenneth and Mamie
entered the room, and came towards them, a smile on her face. Kenneth,
as he  advanced towards
her, was frankly amazed at the transformation in the girl whom he had
not seen for nine years. Jane laughed.</p>
<p>“Don’t you know me, Kenneth? Or must I call you Dr. Harper now?”</p>
<p>“No, my name is still Kenneth⸺” he answered.</p>
<p>“Tell Jane what you called her a few minutes ago, or I will,”
interrupted Mamie. Kenneth looked embarrassed. Jane insisted on being
told, whereupon Mamie repeated Kenneth’s description of Jane as a
child.</p>
<p>Caught between the upper and nether millstones of the raillery of the
two girls, Kenneth tried to explain away his embarrassment, but they
gave him no peace.</p>
<p>“Let me explain,” he begged. “When I went away you were a scrawny
little thing, a regular tomboy and as mischievous as they make them. And
now you’re a—you’re—you’re” Jane laughed at his attempt, somewhat
lacking in fullness, to say what she had become with the passage of the
years.</p>
<p>“Whatever it is you are trying to say, I hope it’s something all
right you are calling me—though from your tone I’m not at all sure,” she
ended, letting a note of mock concern creep in her voice.</p>
<p>By this time Kenneth had somewhat recovered his composure. He entered
into the spirit of play himself by telling her his surprise had been due
to his finding her unchanged from the little girl he had once known, but
Jane laughed at his ineffectual efforts to answer Mamie’s and her
teasing. To change  the
conversation, he demanded that she tell him all that she had been doing
since he saw her last.</p>
<p>“There isn’t much to tell,” she declared. “I went away soon after you
did, going to Fisk University, graduated last June, got a position
teaching in North Carolina, and am home for the holidays. Next year I
want to have enough money to go to Oberlin and finish my music. That’s
all there is to my little story. You are the one who has been having all
sorts of experiences. I want to hear your story.”</p>
<p>“Mine isn’t much longer,” answered Kenneth. “Four years of medical
school. A year’s interneship in New York at Bellevue. Three months in
training camps. A year and a half in France. Six months at the Sorbonne.
Then New York. Then exams at Atlanta for my licence. Home. And here I
am.”</p>
<p>“Don’t you believe him, Jane,” said Mamie.</p>
<p>“That’s just his way of telling it. Ken has had all sorts of exciting
experiences, yet he has come home and we can’t get him to talk about a
thing except building a practice and a hospital.”</p>
<p>“What do you want me to talk about?” asked Kenneth.</p>
<p>“Paris—school—army life what did you see?—how do you like New
York?—is New York as good a place to live in as Paris?”</p>
<p>Kenneth threw up his hands in mock defence at the barrage of
questions Jane and Mamie fired at him.</p>
<p> “Just a minute—just a
minute,” he begged them. “I could talk all night on any one of the
questions you’ve asked and then not finish with it or tell you more than
half. If you two will only be quiet, I’ll tell you as much as I
can.”</p>
<p>Mrs. Harper, hearing the voices, came into the room. The three women
sat in silence as Kenneth told of his years at school, of his stay in
New York, his experiences in the army, of the beauties of Paris even in
war time, of study at a French university. He gave to the narrative a
vividness and air of reality that made his auditors see through his eyes
the scenes and experiences he was describing. Though none of them had
been in France, he made them feel as though they too were walking
through the Place de la Concorde viewing the statues to the eight great
cities of France or shopping in the Rue de la Paix or attempting to
order dinner in a restaurant with an all-too-inadequate French
vocabulary. He finished.</p>
<p>“Now you’ve got to sing for me, Jane, as a reward for all the talking
I’ve been doing.”</p>
<p>With the usual feminine protests that she had no music with her, Jane
went to the open piano. She inquired what he would like to have her
sing.</p>
<p>“Anything except the ‘Memphis Blues,’ which is all I’ve heard since I
came back to Central City,” he answered.</p>
<p>Jane ran over the keys experimentally, improvising. A floor lamp
stood near the piano casting a soft light over her. Her long, delicately
pointed fingers lingered lovingly on the ivory keys, and then she  played the opening bars of
Saint-Saën’s “My Heart at Thy Sweet Voice.” Her voice, a rounded, rich
contralto, showing considerable training, gave to the song a tender
pathos, a yearning, a promise of deep and understanding love. She sang
with a grace and clear phrasing that bespoke the simple charm of the
singer. Kenneth gazed at her in wonder at the amazing metamorphosis of
the shy, gawky child Jane whom he had only rarely noticed, and then with
the condescending air of twenty looking at twelve. In her stead had come
a woman, rounded, attractive even beautiful, intelligent, and altogether
desirable. The chrysalis had changed to the gorgeously coloured
butterfly. Her skin was a soft brown—almost bronze. He thought of
velvety pansies richly coloured—of the warmth of rubies of great price
of the lustrous beauty of the sky on a spring evening. Her eyes shone
with a sparkling and provocative clearness, looking straight at one from
their brown depths. Little tendrils of her black hair at the back of her
neck were disturbed every now and then by the breeze from the open
windows, while above were piled masses of coiled blackness that shone in
the dim light with a glossy lustre. To Kenneth came visions of a
soft-eyed <i>señorita</i> in an old Spanish town leaning from her
balcony while below, to the accompaniment of a muted guitar, her lover
sang to her of his ardent love. Kenneth blushed when he realized that in
every picture he had cast himself for the rôle of gallant
troubadour.</p>
<p>His mother had quietly slipped from the room to  retire for the evening. Mamie had gone to
prepare something cool for them to drink. Kenneth had not heard them go.
In fact, lost in the momentary forgetfulness created by Jane and the
song, he had completely forgotten them. He did not, however, fail to
realize that the dreams he was having were in large measure due to the
soft light, to surprise at the great changes in Jane, to the lulling
seductiveness of the music. He was sure that his feeling was due in
largest measure to a reaction from his unpleasant conversation with Roy
Ewing. He vaguely realized that when on the morrow he saw Jane by
daylight, she would not seem half so charming and attractive. Yet he was
of such a temperament that he could give himself up to the spell of the
moment and extract from it all the pleasure in it. It was in that manner
he put aside the things which were unpleasant, enabling him to shake off
memories like mists of the morning ascending from the depths of a
valley.</p>
<p>The song was ended. Herself caught in its spell, Jane swung into that
most beautiful of the Negro spirituals, “Deep River.” Into it she poured
her soul. She filled the room with the pathos of that song born in the
dark days of slavery of a people torn from their home and thrust into
the thraldom of human bondage.</p>
<p>And then Jane sang “Nobody Knows the Trouble I’ve Seen.” The song
ended, her fingers yet clung to the keys but her hands hung listless.
Kenneth knew not how or when he had risen from his chair and gone to the
piano where he stood behind Jane.  Something deep within them had been touched
by the music—a strange thrill filled them, making them oblivious to
everything except the presence of each other. Kenneth lightly placed his
hands on her shoulders. Without speaking or turning, she placed her
hands for a moment on his. He bent over her while she raised her face to
his, her eyes misty with tears born of the emotion aroused by the song.
Though often laughed at in real life and often distorted in fiction,
love almost at first sight had been born within them. Kenneth slowly
brought her face nearer his while Jane, with parted lips, let the back
of her head rest against his breast. Love, with its strange retroactive
effects, brought to both of them in that moment the sudden realization,
though neither of them had known it, that they had always loved each
other. Not a word had been spoken—each was busy constructing his love in
silence. A great emptiness in their lives had been suddenly,
miraculously filled.</p>
<p>Their lips were almost touching when a noise brought them to
themselves with a shock. It was Mamie. She entered the room bearing a
tray on which were sandwiches, cakes, and tall glasses in which cracked
ice clinked coolingly. Kenneth hid his annoyance and, with as nonchalant
an air as possible, went back to his chair.</p>
<p>When they had eaten, Jane rose to go. Kenneth walked home with her.
Neither spoke until they had reached her gate. Jane entered as Kenneth
held it open for her. He would have followed her in but she turned,
extended her hand to him as a sign of  dismissal, and asked him to leave her there.
Kenneth said nothing, but his face showed his disappointment at being
hastened away by the same girl who less than half an hour before had
almost been in his arms.</p>
<p>“Please don’t say anything, Ken,” she pleaded. “It was my fault—I
shouldn’t have done what I did. I used to worship you when I was little,
but I thought I had gotten over that—until to-night.”</p>
<p>Her voice sank almost to a whisper. In it was a note of trouble and
perplexity. She went on:</p>
<p>“I—oh, Kenneth—what happened to-night must not be repeated.”</p>
<p>Puzzled and a bit hurt, he asked her what she meant.</p>
<p>“Don’t get the wrong idea, Ken. I wouldn’t do anything to hurt you
for the world.”</p>
<p>“But what is it, Jane?” begged Kenneth. “I love you, Jane, have
always loved you. I was blind—until to-night⸺”</p>
<p>Kenneth poured forth the words in a torrent of emotion. Whirling
thoughts tore through his brain. He sought to seize Jane’s hand and draw
her to him, but she eluded him.</p>
<p>“No—no—Kenneth, you mustn’t. I can’t let you make love to me. Let’s
be friends, Ken, and enjoy these few days and forget all we’ve said
to-night, won’t you, please?” she ended pleadingly.</p>
<p>Kenneth said nothing. He turned abruptly and strode away without even
saying good night. Hands thrust deep into his pockets, his head hanging
in disappointment and
wounded pride, he hurried home without once turning to look back. …</p>
<p>Her ten days of vacation passed all too soon for Jane. She and
Kenneth saw each other frequently, but never alone until the night
before she returned to North Carolina. It was at a dance given in her
honour. All evening he had been seeking a dance with her, but met with
no success until the party was almost over. They danced in silence. Jane
seemed suddenly sad. All evening she had been happy, gay, even
flirtatious, but now that she was with Kenneth, her gaiety had been
dropped like a mask. Half-way through the dance they came near a door
that opened on a balcony overlooking a flower garden. Saying nothing to
Jane, Kenneth danced her through the door and on to the balcony, where
they sat on a bench that stood in the semi-darkness. Though it was
December, the air was warm. No sound disturbed the silence of the night
save the music and voices which floated through the open door.</p>
<p>“Haven’t you anything to say?” Kenneth anxiously inquired, taking one
of Jane’s hands in his.</p>
<p>“Nothing except this—I don’t know whether I care for you or not,”
said Jane as she freed her hand and drew herself away. Her voice was
firm and determined. Kenneth, ignorant of the ways of a maid with a man,
said nothing, but his shoulders drooped dejectedly.</p>
<p>“What happened the other night was madness—I was very foolish for
allowing it.” She paused, and  then went on. “Kenneth, I don’t know, I want
my music, I want to see something of life I want to live! I just can’t
tie myself down by marrying—I don’t know whether I’ll ever want to.
You’ll have to wait—if you care to⸺”</p>
<p>It was half command, half question. He said nothing.</p>
<p>He did not know how she longed for him to argue with her, override
her objections, convince her against her will. She waited a full minute.
Still he sat there silent. She rose and re-entered the house, leaving
him there alone.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER VI
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">L</span><span class="smallcaps">ife</span> moved along evenly with Kenneth, busied
with the multitude of duties with which the physician in the half-rural,
half-urban towns of the South must deal. His days were filled with his
blasto work and he was usually to be found in his office until ten or
eleven o’clock every evening. Often he was roused in the middle of the
night to attend some one of his patients. He did not mind this except
when calls came to him from the outlying country districts. Not
infrequently he made long trips of seven, eight, or ten miles into the
country to treat some person who might just as well have called him
during the previous day. He had purchased a Ford runabout in which he
made these trips.</p>
<p>On a Sunday morning soon after his return to Central City, Kenneth
with his mother, Mamie, and Bob attended the Mount Zion Baptist Church,
but this he did without much eagerness, solely as a duty.</p>
<p>Though years had passed since last he entered the church, Kenneth
noticed that it stood as it always had, save that it looked more
down-at-heel than formerly. Before the door stood the same little
groups, eagerly snatching a few words of conversation before entering.
Near the door were ranged the young men, garbed in raiment of varied and
brilliant hue,  ogling the
girls as they passed in with their parents. There was much good-natured
badinage and scuffling among the youths, with an occasional burst of
ribald laughter at the momentary discomfiture of one of their number. As
he passed them, Kenneth smiled to himself as he remembered how he but a
few years since had been one of that crowd around the same door. That
is, one of the crowd until his father, with a stern word or perhaps only
a meaningful glance, had been wont to summon him within the church.
Often had he been teased unmercifully by the other boys when one of
these summonses had come.</p>
<p>Though the jests had been hard to bear, the likelihood of paternal
wrath had been too unpleasant an alternative for him to dare disregard
his father’s commands.</p>
<p>Kenneth noticed the vestibule had survived the passage of years
without apparent change, if one disregarded the increased dinginess of
the carpet. There was the same glass-covered bulletin board with its
list of the sick and of those who were delinquent in the payment of
their dues. There was the same dangling rope with a loop at the end of
it, and the same sexton was about to ring the bell above, announcing the
beginning of the morning service. There were the same yellowed walls,
the same leather-covered swinging doors with the same greasy spots where
countless hands had pushed them to enter the auditorium of the church.
Kenneth smiled to himself as he remembered how he once had declared in a
dispute with a boy whose parents attended the Methodist church near by that the
Mount Zion Baptist Church was “the biggest and finest church in the
whole world.” He thought of the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris, of
St. Paul’s in London, as he recalled the boast of his youth.</p>
<p>Inside, the same air of unchanging permanence seemed also to have
ruled. As he followed the officious usher and his mother and sister to
their pew, Kenneth noted the same rows of hard seats worn shiny by years
of use, the same choir loft to the left of the pulpit with its faded red
curtains. The same worn Bible lay open on the pulpit kept open by a
hymn-book. Beside it was the same ornately carved silver pitcher and
goblet. Kenneth felt as though he had never left Central City when he
looked for and found the patches of calcimine hanging from the ceiling
and the yellowed marks on the walls made by water dripping from leaks in
the roof. As a boy he had amused himself during seemingly interminable
sermons by constructing all sorts of fanciful stories around these same
marks, seeing in them weirdly shaped animals. Once he had laughed aloud
when, after gazing at one of them, it had suddenly dawned upon him that
the shadow cast by a pendent flake of calcimine resembled the lean and
hungry-looking preacher who was pastoring Mount Zion at the time.
Kenneth would never forget the commotion his sudden laughter had caused,
nor the whipping he received when he and his father reached home that
Sunday.</p>
<p>The hum of conversation ceased. The pastor, the  Reverend Ezekiel Wilson, entered the pulpit
from a little door back of it. The choir sang lustily the Doxology. All
the familiar services came back to Kenneth as he sat and looked at the
dusky faces around him.</p>
<p>Preliminaries ended, the Reverend Wilson began to preach. He was a
fat, pompous, oily man—with a smooth and unctuous manner. His voice sank
at times to a whisper—at others, roared until the rafters of the
building seemed to ring with its echoes. He played on it as consciously
as the dried-up little organist in the gaily coloured bonnet did on the
keys of the asthmatic little organ. His text was taken from the 13th
chapter of First Corinthians, first verse that familiar text, “Though I
speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am
become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.”</p>
<p>Slowly, softly, he began to speak.</p>
<p>“Breddern and sisters, they’s a lot of you folks right here this
mawnin’ what thinks you is Christ’uns. You think jus’ ‘cause you comes
here ev’ry Sunday and sings and shouts and rants around dat you is got
the sperit of Jesus in you. Well, I’m tellin’ you this mawnin’ dat you’d
better wake up and get yo’self right with God, ’cause you ain’t no mo
Christ’un dan if you neveh been to chu’ch a-tall. De Good Book says you
got to have char’ty, and de Good Book don’t lie.”</p>
<p>There came from the Amen corner a fervently shouted “Amen!” From
another came as equally 
fervid a shout: “Ain’t it the truth!” The preacher paused for effect. He
mopped his brow and glared around the congregation. His auditors sat in
expectant silence. Suddenly he lashed out in scathing arraignment of the
sins of his flock. Each and every one of its faults he pilloried with
words of fire and brimstone. He painted a vivid and uncomfortably
realistic picture of a burning Hell into which all sinners would
inevitably be cast. Almost with the air of a hypnotist, he gradually
advanced the tempo of his speech. Like a wind playing over a field of
corn, swaying the tops of the stalks as it wills, so did he play on the
emotions and fears and passions of his congregation. Only a master of
human psychology could have done it. It was a living, breathing,
vengeful God he preached, and his auditors fearfully swayed and rocked
to and fro as he lashed them unmercifully. Lips compressed, there came
from them a nasal confirmation of the preacher’s words that ranged from
deep, guttural grunts of approval as he scored a point to a high-pitched
rising and falling moan that sounded like nothing so much as a child
blowing through tissue paper stretched over a comb. Frequently the
preacher would without perceptible pause swing into a rolling, swinging,
half-moaning song which the congregation took up with fervour. The beat
was steadily advanced by the leader until he and his audience were
worked up to an emotional ecstasy bordering on hysteria. His jeremiad
ended, the preacher painted a glowing  picture of the ineffable peace and joy that
came to those who rested their faith in Him who died for the remission
of their sins.</p>
<p>A tumultuous thunderous climax—a dramatic pause and then he swung
into a fervent prayer in which the preacher talked as though his God
were an intimate friend and confidant. The entire drama lasting more
than an hour was thrilling and enervating and theatric. Yet beneath it
lay a devout sincerity that removed the scene from the absurd to that
which bordered on the magnificent. To these humble folk their religion
was the most important thing in their lives, and, after all, what
matters it what a man does? It is the spirit in which he performs an act
that makes it dignified or pathetic or ludicrous—not the act itself.</p>
<p>In spite of his sophistication, Kenneth never was able entirely to
ward off the chills of excitement that ran down his spine at these weird
religious ceremonies. He saw through the whole theatric performance and
yet way down beneath it all there was a sincerity and genuineness that
never failed to impress him. This was not a mere animalism nor was it
the joke that white people sometimes tried to make of it. Fundamentally,
it was rooted and grounded in an immutable and unfailing belief in the
supreme power of a tangible God—a God that personally directed the most
minute of the affairs of the most lowly of creatures. It had been the
guide and refuge of the fathers and mothers of these same people through
the dark days of slavery. In the same manner it was almost the only refuge for these
children and grandchildren of the slaves in withstanding the trials of a
latter-day slavery in many respects more oppressive than the pre-Civil
War variety.</p>
<p>Kenneth walked home from church running over these things in his
mind. Was this religious fervour the best thing for his people? Why did
not the Church attract more intelligent and able young men of his race
instead of men like Reverend Wilson? Why didn’t some twentieth-century
Moses arise to lead them out of the thraldom of this primitive religion?
Would that Moses, when he came, be able to offer a solace as effective
to enable these people of his to bear the burdens that lay so heavily
upon them?</p>
<p>He thought again of his conversation with Roy Ewing. What was the
elusive solution to this problem of race in America? Why couldn’t the
white people of the South see where their course was leading them? Ewing
was right. No white man of the South had ever come out in complete
defiance of the present regime which was so surely damning the South and
America. Kenneth saw his people kept in the bondage of ignorance. Why?
Because it was to the economic advantage of the white South to have it
so. Why was a man like Reverend Wilson patted on the back and every
Negro told that men of his kind were “safe and sane leaders”? Why was
every Negro who too audibly or visibly resented the brutalities and
proscriptions of race prejudice instantly labelled as a radical—a
dangerous character—as one
seeking “social equality”? What was this thing called “social equality”
anyhow? That was an easy question to answer. It was about the only one
he could answer with any completeness. White folks didn’t really believe
that Negroes sought to force themselves in places where they weren’t
wanted, any more than decent white people wanted to force themselves
where they were not invited. No, that was the smoke-screen to hide
something more sinister. Social equality would lead to intermarriage,
they thought, and the legitimatizing of the countless half-coloured sons
and daughters of these white people. Why, if every child in the South
were a legitimate one, more than half of the land and property in the
South would belong to coloured owners.</p>
<p>Did the white people who were always talking about “social equality”
think they really were fooling anybody with their constant denunciation
of it? Twenty-nine States of America had laws against intermarriage. All
these laws were passed by white legislators. Were these laws passed to
keep Negroes from seizing some white woman and forcing her to marry him
against her will? Or were these laws unconscious admissions by these
white men that they didn’t trust their women or their men to keep from
marrying Negroes? Any fool knew that if two people didn’t want to marry
each other, there was no law of God or man to make them marry. No, the
laws were passed because white men wanted to have their own women and
use coloured women too without any law  interfering with their affairs or making
them responsible for the consequences.</p>
<p>Kenneth usually ended these arguments with himself with a feeling of
complete impotence, of travelling around like a squirrel in a circular
cage. No matter where he started or how fast or how far he travelled, he
always wound up at the same point and with the same sense of blind
defeat. Oh, well, better men than he had tried to answer the same
questions and failed. He’d stay to himself and attend to his own
business and let such problems go hang. But in spite of himself he often
found himself enmeshed in this endless maze of reasoning. Just as
frequently he determined to put from himself again the perplexing and
seemingly insoluble problems.</p>
<p>It was after one of these soliloquies on his way from church one
bright Sunday in April that Kenneth reached home and found a call for
him to come at once to a house down on Butler Street, in the heart of
the Negro district in the bottoms. Telling his mother to keep dinner for
him as he would be back shortly, he hurried down State Street. Turning
suddenly into Harris Street, which crossed State, which in turn would
lead him to the house he sought on Butler Street, he caught a fleeting
glimpse of a white man who looked like George Parker, cashier of the
Bank of Central City Parker, if it was he, turned hastily at Kenneth’s
approach and went up a narrow alley which ran off Harris Street. Kenneth
thought nothing of the incident other than a vague  and quickly passing wonder at Parker’s
presence in that part of town.</p>
<p>Kenneth hurried on, instinctively stepping over or around the
numerous children whose complexions ranged in colour from a deep black
to a yellow that was almost white, and mangy-looking dogs that seemed to
infest the street. Approaching the house he sought, he found a group of
excitedly talking Negroes gathered around the gate. The group separated
to let him pass, and from it came one or two greetings to Kenneth in the
form of “Hello, Doc.” He paid little attention to them, but proceeded up
the path to the house.</p>
<p>Entering, he was surprised to find it furnished more ornately and
comfortably than usual in that section. He knew the place of old,
remembering that his father had always warned him against going into
this section. Here it was reported that strange things went on, that a
raid by the police was not uncommon. He had upon one occasion seen the
patrol wagon, better known as the “Black Maria,” drive away loaded with
bottles of whisky and with a nondescript lot of coloured men and women.
Most of the property in this section was owned by white people, which
they held on to jealously. They charged and received rentals two or
three times as high as in other sections of “Darktown.”</p>
<p>Kenneth found in the front room another excited and chattering lot of
men and women. The men seemed rather furtive and were dressed in
“peg-top” trousers with wide cuffs, and gaudily coloured shirts.  The women were clad in red and
pink kimonos and boudoir caps. With an inclusive “Hello, folks,” Kenneth
followed a woman who seemed to be in charge of the house into the next
room. In the centre of the darkened room there stood the bed,
dishevelled, the sheets stained with blood. On them lay a man fully
clothed, his eyes closed as though in great pain, and breathing heavily,
with sharp gasps every few seconds. By the bed, bathing the man’s brow,
stood a woman in a rumpled night-dress and kimono. Kenneth recognized
the man as Bud Ware, sometimes a Pullman porter, who used his
occupation, it was rumoured, to bring liquor from Atlanta, which his
wife sold. It was his wife Nancy who bathed his brow and who moved away
from the bed when Kenneth approached. She informed him that he had come
home unexpectedly from his run, and had been shot. Kenneth said nothing
but went immediately to work. He found Bud with two bullet holes in his
abdomen and one through his right leg. It was evident that he had but a
few hours, at most, to live. Kenneth did what he could to relieve Bud’s
suffering. Turning to Nancy, he told her what he had discovered. She
stared at Kenneth wide-eyed for a minute and then burst forth in an
agony of weeping.</p>
<p>“Oh, Lawdy, why didn’t I do what Bud tol’ me to do? Bud tol’ me to
let dat man alone! Why didn’t I do it? Why didn’t I do it?”</p>
<p>Her screams mounted higher and higher until they reached ear-piercing
shrieks. A head or two were  stuck interrogatively through the opened
door at the sound of Nancy’s woe, and as quickly withdrawn. Kenneth
administered an opiate to Bud to relieve his pain and sat by the bed to
do what he could in the short while that life remained. The sordidness
of the whole affair sickened him and he longed to get away where he
could breathe freely.</p>
<p>Strengthened by the opiate, Bud’s eyes flickered and then opened for
a fraction of a minute. He smiled faintly when he recognized Kenneth. He
made several ineffectual attempts to speak, but each effort resulted
only in a gasp of pain. Kenneth ordered him to lie still. Bud, however,
kept trying to speak. Roused by Nancy’s shrieks, he finally managed to
gasp out a few words, interrupted by spasms of pain that shook his whole
body.</p>
<p>“I knows I ain’t got long, Doc. Dat’s a’ right, Nancy, I ain’t
blamin’ you none. I knows you couldn’t he’p it.”</p>
<p>He fell back on the pillow, coughing and writhing in pain.</p>
<p>“Lif’ me a li’l—hiar—on the pillar, Doc. Dat’s mo’ like—it! Doc—I
ain’t been much ‘count. I tol’ dat man Parker—to stop foolin’ with my
’oman—but—he keep on—comin’ here—when I’m gone. He knew I wuz sellin’
liquor—an’ he tol Nancy he wuz gwine—hav’ his brudder—She’f Parker put
me on—chain gang—if she tell me he come here—w’en I wuz gone.”</p>
<p>He had another paroxysm of coughing and lay for a minute as though
already dead. Kenneth administered restoratives, meanwhile telling Nancy
to keep quiet, which only made her weep the louder. After a few minutes
Bud began speaking again.</p>
<p>“I come home to-day—an’ kotched him here. W’en I got mad an’ tol
him—to get out—and stahted towards him—he grabbed his gun an’—shot me.”
After a pause: “Doc, whyn’t dese white fo’ks—leave our women alone?—I
ain’t nevah bothered none of their women.—An’ now—I’s done got—killed
jus’ ’cause—I—I⸺”</p>
<p>He half raised himself on the pillow, looking at Nancy.</p>
<p>“Doan cry, Nancy gal—doan cry⸺”</p>
<p>He fell back dead. Kenneth, of no further assistance, left Nancy to
her grief after promising to send the undertaker in to prepare Bud’s
body for burial, and made his way out through the crowd, now greatly
increased in numbers, gathered around the door. He wondered if anything
would be done about the murder, at the same time knowing that nothing
would. The South says it believes in purity. What was that phrase the Ku
Kluxers used so much—“preservation of the sanctity of the home,
protection of the purity of womanhood”? Yes, that was it. Suppose the
races of the two principals had been reversed—that Bud Ware had been
caught with George Parker’s wife. Why, the whole town would have turned
out to burn Bud at the stake. Weren’t coloured women considered
human—wasn’t their virtue as dear to them as to white women? Nancy and
Bud weren’t of much good to the community  but if Bud wanted his wife kept inviolate,
hadn’t he as much right to guard her person as George Parker to protect
his wife and two daughters? Again he felt himself up against a blind
wall in which there was no gate, and which was too high to climb. He had
determined to stay out of reach of the long arms of the octopus they
called the race problem—but he felt himself slowly being drawn into its
insidious embrace.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER VII
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">C</span><span class="smallcaps">entral
City</span> was the county seat of Smith County. The morning after the
murder of Bud Ware, Kenneth went down to the County Court House to file
his report on the death. It was a two-story building, originally of red
brick but now of a faded brownish red through the rains and sun of many
years. It sat back from the street about fifty feet and was surrounded
by a yard covered here and there with bits of grass but for the most
part clear of all vegetation, its red soil trampled by many feet on
“co’t day.” The steps were worn thin through much wear of heavy boots.
On either side of the small landing at the top, there hung a bulletin
board on which were pasted or tacked yellow notices of sheriff’s sales,
rewards for the arrest of criminals, and other court documents. The
floor of the dark and narrow hallway was stained a reddish colour by the
mud and dust from the feet of those who had entered the building. Just
inside the doorway, on either side, were rectangular boxes filled with
sawdust for the convenience of those of a tobacco-chewing disposition,
which included most of the male population. The condition of the floor
around the boxes seemed to indicate that only a few of these had
realized for what purpose the boxes had been  placed there. Over all was a liberal
coating of the dust that had blown in the door and windows.</p>
<p>Entering the office of the County Health Commissioner, Kenneth found
that dignitary in his shirtsleeves, feet comfortably placed on top of
his desk.</p>
<p>“Good morning, Mr. Lane. I’ve come to make a report of a death.”</p>
<p>At the sound of Kenneth’s voice, County Commissioner of Health Henry
Lane turned in his chair without moving his feet to see who it was that
had entered. Long, lanky, a two days’ growth of red beard on his face,
Mr. Lane removed the corn-cob pipe from his mouth with a rising and
falling of a prominent Adam’s apple. Seeing that his visitor was only a
Negro, he replaced his pipe in his mouth and, between several jerky
puffs to get it going again, querulously replied:</p>
<p>“Can’t you see I’m busy? Why don’t you save up them repo’ts till you
git a passel of them, and then bring ‘em in? Got no time t’ be writin’
up niggers’ deaths, anyhow. Ev’ry time I turn ‘round, some nigger’s
gittin’ carved up or shot or somepin’.”.</p>
<p>“I understand it’s the law, Mr. Lane, that deaths of anybody, white
or coloured, must be reported by the physician at once.”</p>
<p>“Drat the law. That’s fo’ white folks.”</p>
<p>He drew himself out of his chair with great reluctance and ambled
over to the counter, drawing to him a pad and pencil as he turned
towards Kenneth.</p>
<p>“What nigger’s dead now?” he inquired. </p>
<p>“Bud Ware, who lived at 79 Butler Street,” replied Kenneth.</p>
<p>“How’d he die?” was the next question.</p>
<p>“Shot through the abdomen.”</p>
<p>“Know who shot him?”</p>
<p>“Yes. George Parker.”</p>
<p>“Th’ hell you say! And you come in here to repo’t it?”</p>
<p>Kenneth was somewhat startled at the ferocity of the Commissioner’s
expression, which had replaced that of laziness and resentment at being
disturbed. “I thought it my duty …” he began.</p>
<p>Lane spat disgustedly.</p>
<p>“Duty, Hell! You’re a God-damned fool and one of these damned niggers
that’s always causin’ trouble ‘round here. I always said eddication
spoiled a nigger and, by God, you prove it. Lemme tell you
somepin’—you’d better remember s’long’s you stay ‘round these parts.
When you hear anything ’bout a white man havin’ trouble with a nigger,
you’d better keep your mouth shet. They’s lots of niggers been lynched
for less’n you said this mornin’. Ain’t you got sense enough t’ know you
hadn’t any business comin’ in here t’ tell me ‘bout Mr. Parker? Don’t
you know his brother’s sheriff? If y’ aint, goin’ up No’th tuk away what
li’l’ sense you might’ve had befo’ you went.”</p>
<p>Kenneth stood silent, a deep red flush suffusing his face, while the
official continued his vituperative tirade. His fists, thrust deep into
his pockets, were Elenched until they hurt, but he did not feel the
pain.  He longed to take
that long, yellow, unshaven neck in his hands and twist it until Lane’s
eyes popped out and his face turned black. He knew it would be suicide
if he did it. He realized now that he had done an unwise thing in
telling Lane who had killed Bud Ware—he should have remembered and said
that he did not know. If he was going to stay in the South, he would
have to remember these things.</p>
<p>When Lane had paused for breath, Kenneth bade him good morning and
left the room. As he went down the steps, he heard Lane shouting after
him:</p>
<p>“You’d better not lemme hear o’you doin’ any talkin’ ‘bout this. If
y’ do, you’ll fin’ yo’self bein’ paid a visit one o’ these nights by the
Kluxers!”</p>
<p>Hardly had Kenneth left the court house before Lane rushed as fast as
his natural indolence would permit him into the office of Sheriff Robert
Parker—known throughout the county as “She’f Bob.” Lane was so indignant
he spluttered in trying to speak. The sheriff looked at him amusedly and
counselled:</p>
<p>“Ca’m yo’self, Henry. What’s eatin’ you?”</p>
<p>“Bob, d’you know George shot and killed a nigger buck over in
‘Darktown’ yestiddy mornin’ named Ware?” Lane finally managed to get
out.</p>
<p>“Yeh. What about it? George tol me about it las’ night,” was the
sheriff’s easy reply.</p>
<p>“Well, that nigger doctor Harper who’s been up No’th studyin’ and
come back here las’ fall, come into my office this mornin’ to repo’t it,
and he had the gall t’ tell me George done it.”</p>
<p> “Th’ black bastard!
What th’ hell’s he got to do with it?”</p>
<p>“Said it was his duty. You bet I tol him good an’ plenty where he got
off at. Guess he won’t come in here repo’tin’ no more ‘accidents’ like
George run into.”</p>
<p>Sheriff Parker’s face had assumed the colour of an overripe tomato as
he jumped to his feet and banged his right fist on the table with a
resounding thwack.</p>
<p>“I’ll keep my eye on that nigger,” he promised. “His daddy was as
good a nigger as ever I did see, but they ain’t no way o’tellin’ what
these young bucks’ll do. Roy Ewing was saying only this mornin’ that
Bob, that nigger doctor’s kid brother, was tellin’ him the other day
that he’d have to stop them boys ‘roun’ the sto’ from botherin’ with th’
nigger gals when they pass by. Humph! They ain’t no nigger gal that’s
pure after she’s reached fo’teen years ol’. Yep, I’ll jus’ kep my eye on
those boys, and the first chance I git, I’ll⸺!”</p>
<p>His eyes narrowed in malevolent fashion as he left his threat
unuttered.</p>
<p>In the meantime, Kenneth had gone home. He hesitated to talk the
matter over with Bob or tell him what had happened to Bud Ware or what
had taken place at the court house that morning. Bob was so hot-headed
and insults made him angry so easily, he was afraid of what might be the
outcome if Bob knew what had occurred. He would breathe a deep sigh of
relief when Bob left in the fall to go back to er school. Up in Atlanta there wouldn’t be
so many chances for Bob to run up against these white people and,
besides, Bob’s studies would keep him busy, leaving little time to brood
over the indignities he had suffered. Kenneth determined that when Bob
had finished his course at Atlanta University, he would urge him to go
to Columbia University or Haryard and study law, and then settle down in
some Northern city. It wouldn’t do for Bob to come back as he had done
to Central City. Sooner or later Bob’s fiery temper would give way.</p>
<p>He wondered to whom he could turn to talk this thing out. He felt
that if he didn’t have a chance soon to unburden his soul to somebody,
he would go insane. He thought of his mother. No, that wouldn’t do. His
mother had enough to worry about without taking his burdens on her
shoulders.</p>
<p>Mamie? No, she wouldn’t do either. She had no business knowing about
the sordidness of the affair of Bud Ware and Nancy and George Parker.
All her life she had been sheltered and kept away, as much as is
possible in a Southern town, from the viciousness and filth and
brutality of the race relations of the town.</p>
<p>Mr. Wilson, the clergyman? He was ignorant and coarse, but he had
lived in South Georgia all his life and he would know better what to do
than anybody else. He determined to go and talk with Mr. Wilson that
evening as soon as he was free. He had hardly made the decision when
Mr. Wilson non himself
entered the reception room and called out to Kenneth as he sat in his
office:</p>
<p>“Good mawnin’, Brudder Harper. It certainly has done my heart good to
see you attendin’ chu’ch ev’ry Sunday with your folks. Mos’ of these
young men and women, as soon’s they get some learning, thinks they’s too
good to ‘tend chu’ch. But, as I says to them all th’ time, th’ Lawd
ain’t goin’ t’ bless none of them, even if they is educated, if they
don’t keep close to Him.”</p>
<p>Kenneth rose and showed his visitor to a seat. He did so with an
inward repugnance as the coarseness of the man repelled him. Mr. Wilson
seemed always overheated even in the coldest weather, and his face shone
with a greasiness that seemed to indicate that his body excreted oil
instead of perspiration. Yet, perhaps this man could give him some ray
of no light, if there was any to be had.</p>
<p>He told Mr. Wilson of his experiences of the past two days. The
preacher’s eyes widened with a mild surprise and the unctuous,
benevolent mask which he wore most of his waking hours seemed to drop
rapidly as he heard Kenneth through to the end without comment. At the
same time he dropped his illiterate speech much to Kenneth’s surprise,
when he finally spoke.</p>
<p>“Dr. Harper, I’ve been watching you since you came back here. I knew
that you were trying to keep away from this trouble that’s always going
on around here. That’s just why I came here to-day.  Your case is a hard one, but it’s small to
what a lot of these others are feeling. I have asked a number of the
more sensible coloured men to meet at any house to-night. I think it
would be a good thing to talk over these things and try to find a way to
avoid any trouble.”</p>
<p>Kenneth looked at him in surprise, not at the idea of holding a
meeting, but at the language the man was using.</p>
<p>“I hope you’ll pardon me for asking so personal a question, Reverend
Wilson, but you don’t talk now as I’ve always heard you before. Why,
your language now is that of an educated man, and before you—you—talked
like a—like a⸺”</p>
<p>Mr. Wilson laughed easily.</p>
<p>“There’s a reason—in fact, there are two reasons why I talk like
that. The first is because of my own folks. Outside of you and your
folks, the Phil. lips family, and one or two more, all of my
congregation is made up of folks with little or no education. They’ve
all got good hard common sense, it’s true. They’d have to have that in
order just to live in the South with things as they are. But they don’t
want a preacher that’s too far above them they’ll feel that they can’t
come to him and tell him their troubles if he’s too highfalutin. I try
to get right down to my folks, feel as they feel, suffer when they
suffer, laugh with them when they laugh, and talk with them in language
they can understand.”</p>
<p>Mr. Wilson smiled, almost to himself, as memories of contacts with
his lowly flock came to him.</p>
<p> “I remember when I
first started preaching over at Valdosta. I was just out of school and
was filled up with the ambition to raise my people out of their
ignorance. I was determined I would free them from a religion that
didn’t do anything for them but make them shout and holler on Sunday. I
was going to give them some modern religion based on intelligence
instead of just on feeling and emotion.”</p>
<p>He chuckled throatily in recollecting the spiritual and religious
crusade on which he had based such exalted hopes.</p>
<p>“I preached to them and told them of Aristotle and Shakespeare and
Socrates. One Sunday, after I’d preached what I thought was a mighty
fine sermon, one old woman came up after the services and said to me:
“Brer Wilson, dat’s a’ right tellin’ us ‘bout Shakespeare and Homer and
all dem other boys. But what we want is for you t’ tell us somethin’
‘bout Jesus!’”</p>
<p>Kenneth laughed with the preacher at the old woman’s insistence on
his not straying from the religion to which they were used.</p>
<p>“I had to discard my high-flown theories and come down to my folks if
I wanted to do any good at all.”</p>
<p>He continued:</p>
<p>“These same folks, however, don’t want you to come down too close.
Like all people with little education, whether they’re black, white, or
any other colour, they like to look up to their leaders. So I use a few
big words now and then which have a grand and rolling sound, and they
feel that I am even more  wonderful because I do know how to use big
words but don’t use them often.”</p>
<p>He paused while Kenneth looked at this man and saw him in a new
light. He had known that Mr. Wilson, many years before coming to Central
City, had attended a theological seminary in Atlanta, and he had
wondered how a man could attend a school of theology of any standing and
yet use such poor English. It had never occurred to him that it might be
deliberate.</p>
<p>“And then there’s another reason,” continued Reverend Wilson. “The
white folks here are mighty suspicious of any Negro who has too much
learning, according to their standards. They figure he’ll be stirring up
the Negroes to fighting back when any trouble arises. I had to make a
decision many years ago. I decided that somebody had to help these poor
coloured folks bear their burdens, and to comfort and cheer them. I knew
that if I came out and said the things I thought and felt, I would
either be taken out of my house some night and lynched, or else I’d be
run out of town. So I decided that I’d smile and bear it and be what the
white folks think they want—what the coloured folks call a ‘white man’s
nigger.’ It’s been mighty hard, but the Lord has given me the strength
somehow or other to stand it this far.”</p>
<p>With his deliberately imperfect English, there had gone from the
preacher’s face the subservient smile. Kenneth felt his heart warming to
this man. He found his feeling of distaste and repulsion dissipating, now that the shell had
been removed and he saw beneath the surface. The simile of the
protective device of the chameleon came to his mind. Yes, the Negro in
the South had many things in common with the chameleon—he had to be able
to change his colour figuratively to suit the environment of the South
in order to be allowed to stay alive. His own trouble with the Parkers
and Lane seemed much more trivial now than before. He looked at
Mr. Wilson and asked:</p>
<p>“What’s the purpose of this meeting to-night? How can I help,
Reverend Wilson?”</p>
<p>“It’s like this. A good part of my congregation is made up of folks
who live out in the country. They’ve had a lot of trouble for years
getting honest settlements from the landlords on whose land they work.
Within the last five years, two of my members have been lynched when
they wouldn’t stand for being cheated any longer. The folks out there
are in a pretty bad way, and they want us to advise with them as to the
best way to act. I haven’t time to go into the details now, but it’ll
all be taken up to-night. Can I count on your being there? We need a man
like you, with your education.”</p>
<p>Kenneth deliberated several minutes before giving his answer. What
Mr. Wilson wanted him to do was just exactly what he had determined not
to do. But what harm could come from attending the meeting? If he didn’t
want to take any part in the plans, he didn’t have to. Anyhow, it seemed
that the more a man tried to keep away from the race question, the mo more deeply involved he
became in it. Might as well do what little he could to help, if he
didn’t have to take too prominent a part. He’d go anyway. He told
Reverend Wilson they could look for him that night.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER VIII
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">K</span><span class="smallcaps">enneth</span> was late in reaching the meeting-place
that night. When he arrived he found all there waiting for him. Besides
himself and Mr. Wilson were the Reverend Richard Young, pastor of Bethel
African Methodist Episcopal Church, and Herbert Phillips, Jane’s father.
There were also three men from the farming district whom Kenneth did not
know, but who were introduced as Tom Tracy, Hiram Tucker, and James
Swann.</p>
<p>Mr. Wilson opened the meeting after the introductions had been
completed.</p>
<p>“Brothers, we’ve met here this evenin’ to talk over some way we can
he’p these brothers who live out in the country and who ain’t been able
to get an honest settlement from the folks they’s been farmin’ for. I’m
going to ask Brother Tucker to tell us just how things are with the
folks out his way. Brother Tucker.”</p>
<p>“Brother” Tucker rose and stood by the table around which they were
seated and on which flickered an oil lamp. He was a man between fifty
and sixty years of age, of medium height and thick-set. His black skin
was wrinkled with age and toil. His hands, as they rested on the table
in front of him, were gnarled and hardened through a lifetime of  ploughing and hoeing and the
other hard work of farm life. It was Mr. Tucker’s face, however, which
attracted interest. Out of the rolls of skin there shone two kindly,
docile eyes. One gained the impression that these eyes had seen
tragedies on top of tragedies, as indeed they had, and their owner had
been taught by dire necessity to look upon them in a philosophic and
pacifist manner. One remembered a biblical description: “He was a man of
sorrows and acquainted with grief.” Kenneth, as he looked at him, felt
that Socrates and Aristotle and Jesus Christ must have had eyes like
Brother Tucker’s. His impression was heightened by Mr. Tucker’s hair. Of
a snowy whiteness, his head bald on top, his hair formed a circle around
his head that reminded Kenneth of the picture-cards used at Sunday
school when he was a boy, where the saints had crowns of light hovering
over their heads. The only difference was that Mr. Tucker’s halo seemed
to be a bit more firmly and closely attached than those of the saints,
which he remembered always seemed to be poised perilously in mid-air. He
had often wondered, as he gazed intently at the pictures, what would
have happened had a strong gust of wind come suddenly upon the saints,
and blown their haloes away.</p>
<p>Mr. Tucker began speaking slowly, in the manner of one of few words
and as one unused to talking in public.</p>
<p>“Brudders, me ‘n’ Brudder Tracy, and Brudder Swann ast Reverend
Wilson here to let us come t’  town some time and talk over with you
gent’men a li’l’ trouble we’s been havin’. Y’ see, all of us folks out
dat way wuks on shares like dis. We makes a ‘greement wif de landlord to
wuk one year or mo’. He fu’nishes de lan’ and we puts de crap in de
soil, wuks it, and den gathers it. We’s sposed to ‘vide it share and
share alike wif de landlord but it doan wuk out dat way. If us cullud
folks ain’t got money enough to buy our seed and fert’lizer and food and
the clo’es we needs du’in’ de year, we is allowed t’ take up dese things
at de sto’. Den when we goes to settle up after de cott’n and cawn’s
done laid by, de sto’ man who wuks in wif de landlord won’t giv’ us no
bill for whut we done bought but jes’ gives us a li’l piece of paper wif
de words on it: “Balance Due.”</p>
<p>He paused to wipe the perspiration from his face caused by the
unusual experience of speaking at such length. He continued:</p>
<p>“An’ dat ain’t all. W’en we starts to pickin’ our cotton, dey doan
let us ca’y it to de gin and weigh it ourself. De lan’lord send his
wagons down in de fiel’ and as fas’ as we picks it, dey loads it on de
wagons and takes it away. Dey doan let us know how much it weighs or how
much dey sells it for. Dey jus’ tells us it weighs any ‘mount de
lan’lord wants to tell us, and dey says dey sol’ it at any price dey
set. W’en we comes to settle up for de year, dey ‘ducts de balance due’
from what we’s got comin’ t’us from our share of de craps. I’s been
wukin’ for nigh on to six years for Mr. Taylor out near  Ashland and ev’y year I goes
deeper in debt dan de year befo’. Las’ year I raised mo’ dan twenty-fo’
bales of cott’n dat weighed mo’ dan five hundred poun’s each. My boy Tom
whut’s been t’ school figgered out dat at eighten cents a poun’—and
dat’s de price de paper said cott’n sol’ at las’ year—I oughter got mo’
dan a thousan’ dollars for my share. An’ dat ain’t all neither. Dey was
nearly twelve tons of cott’n seed dat was wuth ‘bout two hundred and
fo’ty dollars. An’den dey was mo’ dan three hundred bush’ls of cawn at a
dollar’n a ha’f a bush’l dat makes fo’ hundred and fifty dollars mo’.
All dat t’gether makes nearly three thousan’ dollars an’ I oughter got
‘bout fifteen hundred dollars fo’ my share.”</p>
<p>Tucker stopped again and shifted his feet while Tracy and Swann
nodded agreement with his statements.</p>
<p>“Las’ year me ‘n’ my wife said we wuz gwine t’ get along without
spendin’ no mo’ money at de sto’ dan we had to, so’s we could get out of
debt. We wukked ha’d and all our chillen we made wuk in de fiel’s too.
My boy Tom kept account of ev’ything we bought at de sto’, and when de
year ended he figgered it up an’ he foun’ we’d done spent jus’ even fo’
hundred dollars. But when we goes to make a settlement at de end of de
year, Mr. Taylor said he sol our cott’n at eight cent a poun’ and
didn’have but sev’n hundred and thutty-five dollars comin’ to us. An’
den he claim we tuk up ‘leven hundred dollars wuth of stuff at de sto’
which he done paid for, 
so that leave me owin’ him three hundred ‘n’ sixty-five dollars dat I
got to wuk out next year.”</p>
<p>His face took on a dejected look as though the load had become almost
too heavy to bear. His voice took on at the same time a plaintive and
discouraged tone.</p>
<p>“An’ when you adds on dat three hundred dollars dat Mr. Taylor says I
owed him from las’ year, dat makes neah’ly sev’n hundred dollars I owes,
and it doan look like I’s evah goin’t git out of debt. An’ I thought we
wuz goin’ to be able to sen’ Tom and Sally and Mirandy t’ Tuskegee dis
year off de ‘leven hundred dollars I thought I wuz gwine t’ make.”</p>
<p>The discouraged air changed to one of greater courage and
determination. His voice rose in his resentment and excitement.</p>
<p>“Now I’s tiahed of all dis cheatin’ an’ lyin’! Mr. Taylor mus’ take
me for a fool if he thinks I’m gwine stan’ for dis way of doin’ things
all de time. I stahted to tell him dat I knew he wuz cheatin’ me in
Janua’y w’en he give me dat statemen’, but den I ‘membered whut happen
t’ Joe Todd two years ago w’en he tol’ dat ol’ man Stanton dat he wukked
for, de same thing. W’en ol’ man stahted thit Joe, Joe hit him fust and
run. Dey came one night and call Joe to his do’ and tuk him down in de
swamp an’ de nex’ mawnin’ dey foun’ Joe full of bullets, hangin’ to a
tree. De paper say Joe done spoke insultin’ to a white ‘oman, but all de
cullud folks, an’ de white too, know dat Joe ain’t nevah even seen no
white ’oman dat day. Dey knew dat if dey say he ‘sulted  a white ’oman, de folks up
Nawth won’t crit’cize dem for lynchin’ a nigger down here in Georgy. So
I jus’ kep’ my mouth close’. Now we wants t’ know if dey ain’t somethin’
we c’n do t’ make dese white folks we wuks for stop cheatin’ an’ robbin’
us po’ cullud folks.”</p>
<p>He sat down, evidently greatly relieved at finishing a task so
arduous. Kenneth had listened in amazement to the story of exploitation,
crudely told, yet with a simplicity that was convincing and eloquent.
Having lived in the South all his life, he naturally was not unaware of
the abuses under the “share-cropping” or “tenant-farming” system in the
South, but it had never been brought home to him so forcefully how close
at hand and how oppressive and dishonest the system really was. No
wonder the South lynched, disfranchised, Jim-Crowed the Negro, he
reflected. If the Negro had a yote and a voice in the local government
of affairs, most of these bankers and merchants and landowners would
have to go to work for the first time in their lives instead of waxing
fat on the toil of humble Negroes like Hiram Tucker. He turned to Tucker
to get further information on the system.</p>
<p>“Mr. Tucker, have you and the other folks like you ever thought of
trying to get loans from the Federal Government through the banks they
have established to aid farmers in buying land and raising their
crops?”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes, Doc. Soon’s they started lendin’ money to farmers, I ’plied
for a loan to buy me a li’l’ place  dat I wuz gwine t’ wuk an’ pay for off whut
I raised. But dey tol’ me dey didn’ have no funds t’ lento niggers an’
dat dey already done loaned all dey had to de white farmers. W’en I ast
dem to put my name down on de lis’ to get a loan when some mo’ money
came in, dey tol me dat it wa’n’t no use ‘cause dey already had so many
white folks’ names down on de lis’ dat dey nevah would come to de cullud
folks.”</p>
<p>“Did you think about writing to Washington and telling them that they
were discriminating against Negro farmers?” questioned Kenneth.</p>
<p>“Yas, suh, we done dat too. But dey wrote us back dat de onliest way
any loan could be made was th’u’ de local agents, so dat didn’t come to
nuthin’.”</p>
<p>“But, good Lord, they can’t discriminate in that way against you
without something being done about it!” was Kenneth’s indignant
comment.</p>
<p>Tucker looked at him with a wan smile that was almost pitying at the
ignorance of the younger man. His voice became paternal.</p>
<p>“Son, dat’s jes’ zactly like de man whut wuz in jail and his frien’
come by and ast him whut dey put him in jail for. When de man in jail
tol’ him whut he wuz ‘cused of, de man on de outside said: ’Dey can’t
put you in jail for dat! De man dat was lookin’ out at him th’u’ de bars
laughed and said: ‘But I’se in jail!’ An’ dat’s de way ‘tis wif de
cullud folks in de Souf. Dey’s lots of things dey can’t do to ’em but
dese white folks does it jes’ de same. I reckon you got a lot of things
t’ learn yet, Doc, spite of goin’ up Nawth t’ study.”</p>
<p> Kenneth felt
properly rebuked by this humble man who, though illiterate, was far from
being ignorant. He joined in, but not very heartily, at the general
laughter at Tucker’s homely sally.</p>
<p>Mr. Wilson, as acting chairman, ended the discussion by calling on
Tom Tracy. Tracy was a much younger man than Tucker and was about
Kenneth’s age. Tall, well built, intelligent looking, his dark brown
face had worn a scowl of discontent and resentment while Tucker had been
talking. He began talking in a clear voice that but poorly masked the
bitterness he felt but which he tried to keep out of his voice. Older
men like Mr. Tucker were always quick to rebuke any sign of “uppishness”
in the younger generation.</p>
<p>“I graduated from Tuskegee three years ago. My old mother worked
herself almost to death to keep me in school, and I came back here
determined to earn enough money to let her rest the balance of her life.
But she and my father had been living all their lives just like
Mr. Tucker here, and they didn’t have anything to give me a start. So I
went to work on shares, taking that thirty acres that joins on to Mr.
Tucker’s farm on the South. I took this land that wasn’t thought to be
any good, because it had been exhausted through overworking it year
after year. I bought some new ploughs and fixed it up fine. I thought I
could put the things I learned at Tuskegee into practice and in a couple
of years pay off all I owed. But instead of doing that, I’m getting
deeper in debt every year. I rent my place from Ed Stewart and  he knows that I know he’s
cheating and robbing and lying to me, but when I try to show him where
he is wrong in his figures, all he does is to get mad and start to
cussing me and telling me that if I don’t keep a civil tongue in my
head, the Ku Klux Klan will be hearing about this ‘sassy young nigger
Tracy’ and I’ll wish I had kept my mouth shut. I’m getting sick of the
whole thing, too. If it wasn’t for the old folks, I expect I’d ‘a’
started something long ago. They are all talking about me being a
dangerous character out my way already. Say I’m too ‘uppity’ and I need
to be taught a lesson to show me that ‘niggers must stay in their
places.’”</p>
<p>Tracy finished speaking in a tone that was almost a shout. It could
be seen that he was very near the breaking-point from brooding over the
wrongs he had suffered.</p>
<p>Mr. Phillips, who had said nothing, broke in with a question.</p>
<p>“Tom, why don’t you move away from Ed Stewart’s place if he doesn’t
treat you right?”</p>
<p>Tracy replied bitterly:</p>
<p>“Yes, suppose I tried to leave, what would happen? The same day I
left, Sheriff Parker would come and get me. They’d put me on trial for
jumping my contract and fine me. Old Stewart would be in court to
testify against me. He’d pay my fine and then I’d have to go back to
Stewart’s place and work a year or two for nothing, paying off the fine.
A fat chance I’ve got with the cards all stacked against me!”</p>
<p> Mr. Young, of the
Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, nodded assent to Tracy’s
statement.</p>
<p>“Brother Tracy’s right. Look at what happened to Jeff Anderson down
near Valdosta last spring. He ran away and got to Detroit where he had a
good job working in an automobile plant. They swore out a warrant
against him for stealing, brought him back, and the last I heard of him
he was back down there working out a three-hundred-dollar fine. No,
Brother Phillips, you’ve been reading the law that applies to white
folks—not to us coloured people.”</p>
<p>James Swann’s story was along the same lines as the others. The seven
men entered into a discussion of ways and means of taking some action
which would alleviate conditions before the harvesting of the crop which
was now in the ground. One suggestion after another was offered, only to
be as quickly discarded because of local difficulties. Midnight came,
with no decision reached. When it became apparent that nothing would be
settled, Kenneth was chosen with Mr. Wilson and Mr. Phillips to work out
some plan to be reported at the meeting to be held one week later.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER IX
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">T</span><span class="smallcaps">here</span> was being held another meeting the same
night. Two miles from Central City, to the North, was a natural
auditorium, an amphitheatre formed by three hills. In this place a
meeting alfresco was in progress. Though the place was far enough from
the road to be reasonably free from prying intruders, sentinels paced
the narrow roads that led to the place of assemblage. Skeleton-like
pine-trees formed an additional barrier to the lonely spot, making as
they did a natural fringe atop the three hills.</p>
<p>There was no moon. Light was furnished by pine torches fastened in
some instances to trees, in others borne aloft by members of the
gathering. About three hundred men were ranged in a circle around a
rudely carved cross stuck in the ground. Each man was garbed in a long
white robe reaching to his feet. On the left breast of each hood was a
cross with other strange figures. Over the head of each man was a cowl
with holes for eyelets. It was a meeting of Central City Klan, Knights
of the Ku Klux Klan, Realm of Georgia. The Exalted Cyclops, whose voice
bore a remarkable likeness to that of Sheriff Parker, was initiating new
members into the mysteries of the order. He held in his hand a  sheet from which he was
reading the oath which the “aliens” repeated after him with their right
hands upraised. Whether through fright or excitement or because the
night air was chilly, the voices of the embryo “knights” had a strange
quaver in them. Around them, rank on rank, stood the Klansmen, who
followed the ceremony closely.</p>
<p>“… will willingly conform—to all regulations, usages, and
requirements—of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan—which do now exist—or
which may hereafter—be enacted—and will render—at all times—loyal
respect, and steadfast support—to the Imperial Authority of same. …”</p>
<p>The droning voices ended the monotonous recital. The flickering
torches gave forth a weird light that was lost in the darkness cast by
the trees. The pungent odour of burning resin and the thick stifling
smoke were blown by vagrant breezes into the faces of the hooded
figures, causing a constant accompaniment of coughs, sneezes, and curses
to the mumbled words. A recent rain-storm had left the low-lying ground
soggy and damp and mightily uncomfortable underfoot. The crowd shifted
uneasily as their feet grew cold with the dampness. Moths, mosquitoes,
and other flying insects, attracted by the flaring lights, swarmed,
getting beneath the cowls and robes and adding to the discomfort of the
wearers. Even the imperfect illumination showed the cheap material of
which the disguises were made, exhibited the wrinkles and dirt around
the hems, revealed every aspect  of the ill-fitting garments. Once from a
spluttering torch there fell a bit of blazing resin on the hand of the
man holding the light. With a yell he dropped the torch, danced and
howled with pain, a ludicrous figure, until the agony had subsided. The
torch, flung hastily away, set fire to the underbrush into which it had
been cast. An unlooked-for intermission in the ceremonies followed as a
score of the figures, holding the skirts of their robes aloft like old
maids frightened at the appearance of a mouse, stamped out the fire,
circling and yelling like a band of whirling deryishes.</p>
<p>Stodgy, phlegmatic, stupid citizens by day, these by night went
through the discomforts of so unprepared a meeting-place, and through
the absurdities of the rites imposed upon them by clever rogues who
extracted from them fees and donations for the privilege of being made
to appear more silly than is usually apparent. Add to that gullibility a
natural love of the mysterious and adventurous and an instinct towards
brute action restrained only by fear of punishment, by a conjuring of
bogies and other malevolent dangers, and one understands, at least in
part, the presence of these three hundred “white, Gentile, Protestant”
citizens of Central City at this meeting.</p>
<p>The initiation ended, the Exalted Cyclops ordered the Kligrapp or
secretary to read several communications from the Imperial Klan Palace
at Atlanta. This he did, struggling manfully through the weird and
absurd verbiage that would have made any of  the men present howl with laughter had he
heard his children using it in their play. Instead it was listened to
attentively, seriously, and solemnly.</p>
<p>Then followed a recital of the work to be done by the local Klan. The
Kligrapp consulted a sheet of paper in his hand.</p>
<p>“The eye that never sleeps has been seeking out those in our city who
have acted in a manner displeasing to the Invisible Empire. There is in
Central City a nigger wench named Nancy Ware who has been saying evil
things against our brother, George Parker. In the name of our sacred
order, and in the furtherance of our supreme duty of preservation of
white supremacy, she is being watched and will be treated so as to end
her dangerous utterances.”</p>
<p>At this statement a robed figure that, even under the disguise,
seemed to resemble him who had been “defamed” by Nancy Ware’s tongue
nodded approvingly. The Kligrapp continued after a pause:</p>
<p>“Word has also come to us from Brothers Ed Stewart and Taylor that
there’s a young nigger named Tom Tracy out this way who’s going around
among the niggers saying that they have got to stop white people from
robbing them on their crops. Tracy hasn’t done anything but talk thus
far, but we will keep our eye on him and stop him if he talks too much.”
Cowled heads nodded approvingly.</p>
<p>“And then there’s a nigger doctor who came in my office I mean, he
went into the office of Health Commissioner Lane—and had the gall to
repo’t the  death of a
nigger bootlegger and say that a white man had killed him for fooling
around with the nigger’s wife. This nigger’s daddy was one of the best
niggers that ever lived here in this town, and this boy’s keeping away
from the other trouble-making niggers, but we’ve got to watch all these
niggers that’s been spoiled by goin’ to school.” He added, as an
afterthought: “… up Nawth.”</p>
<p>And so he droned on. Negroes, two Jews, three men suspected of
Catholic leanings—all were condemned by the self-appointed arbiters of
morals and manners. One or two men were singled out as violating the
code of morals by consorting with Negro women. There was not much to
report on this score, as those who were violating this rule in Central
City had rushed, on formation of a Klan there, to join the order, that
they might gain immunity from attack and yet continue their extra-legal
activities without check or interference. With the conclusion of the
Kligrapp’s report, the meeting dispersed, the members silently entered
the woods and there disrobing, and scattering to their various homes.
Some went towards “Factoryville,” some towards the country districts,
others climbed into automobiles parked near the road and drove towards
the residential section of Central City where lived the more affluent
merchants and other upper-class whites of the town.</p>
<p>The place was soon deserted. The ceremony had been a strange mixture
of the impressive and the absurd. There was underneath the ridiculously
 worded language, the
amusing childlike observance of the empty ceremonies, the queer
appearance of the robes all designed alike with little regard for
fatness or thinness of the prospective wearers, a seriousness which
betokened a belief in the urgent need of their organizing in such a
manner. They had been duped so long by demagogues, deluded generation
after generation into believing their sole hope of existence depended on
oppression and suppression of the Negro, that the chains of the
ignorance and suppression they sought to fasten on their Negro
neighbours had subtly bound them in unbreakable fashion. They opposed
every move for better educational facilities for their children, for
improvement of their health or economic status or welfare in general, if
such improvement meant better advantages for Negroes.</p>
<p>Creatures of the fear they sought to inspire in others, their lives
are lived in constant dread of the things of evil and terror they
preached. It is a system based on stark, abject fear—fear that he whom
they termed inferior might, with opportunity, prove himself not
inferior. This unenlightened viewpoint rules men throughout the South
like those who formed the Central City Klan—dominates their every action
or thought—keeps the whites back while the Negro—in spite of what he
suffers—always keeps his face towards the sun of achievement. …</p>
<p>In spite of the secrecy surrounding the meeting, next morning all
Central City talked of what had taken place on the previous evening. In
such a town, where little diversion exists, the inhabitants seize with
 avidity upon every
morsel of news that promises entertainment. Though they had taken
fearful oaths of secrecy, it was asking too much of human frailty to
expect three hundred men to refrain even from mysterious hints of their
doings. With the love that simple minds have of the clandestine, the
midnight secrecy, the elaborately arranged peregrinations to the place
of meeting, the safeguards adopted by the leaders not so much to prevent
interference as to impress their followers, the “inviolable oath,” the
grips and passwords—all these added to the human desire to be considered
important in the eyes of family and friends and neighbours. Thus many of
the three hundred dropped hints to their wives of what had been said and
done. Over back fences, at the stores on Lee Street, in the numerous
places where women contrived to meet and gossip, the one topic discussed
was the meeting of the night before. One told her bit of information to
another, who in turn contributed her mite. Each in turn told a third and
a fourth. With each telling, the ball of gossip grew, and each
repetition bore artistic additions of fact or fancy designed to add to
the drama of the story. By noon the compounded result assumed the
proportions of a feat bordering on the heroic.</p>
<p>At the noonday meal, known as dinner, the men found themselves viewed
in a new and admiring light by their spouses and offspring. They basked
in the temporary glamour and sought to add to the fame of their midnight
prowling by elaborate hints of deeds of dark and magnificent
proportions.</p>
<p> In turn, to the
Negro section of Central City were borne the tales by cooks and
laundresses and maids, servants, with acutely developed ears, in the
houses of the whites. Everywhere in the Negro section, in homes, on
street corners, over back fences, the news was discussed by the dusky
inhabitants of the town. In the eyes of a few, fear could be discerned.
Most of the Negroes, however, discussed the news as they would have
talked about the coming of the circus to town. Some talked loudly and in
braggart fashion of what they would do if the “Kluxers” bothered them.
Others examined for the hundredth time well-oiled revolvers. Most
generally the feeling was a hope the Klan would not bother any coloured
person—but if it did—! …</p>
<p>It was natural that the news should eventually reach Nancy Ware and
Tom Tracy and, last of all, Kenneth. Mrs. Amos, bustling with
importance, hastened as fast as her rheumatism would allow to tell
Mrs. Harper what the Klansmen had said or, to be more accurate, what
Dame Rumour said the Klansmen had said, about Kenneth and Bob. It was
obvious the two men had taken on a new importance in her eyes in being
singled out for the attention of the clandestine organization.</p>
<p>That night in Kenneth’s office the brothers talked over the news.
Kenneth scoffed at what seemed to him a fantastic and improbable tale.
He looked searchingly at his brother.</p>
<p>“Well Bob, what do you make of it?”</p>
<p>“Trouble for somebody,” said Bob positively.  “And I have a sort of feeling that that
somebody is us,” he added after a pause.</p>
<p>“I’m not so sure,” was Kenneth’s doubtful rejoinder. “Some of these
Crackers are just mean enough to start something, but I’m pretty sure
there are enough decent white people in Central City to check any
trouble that might start.”</p>
<p>Bob said nothing, though his face showed plainly he did not share his
brother’s confidence. Kenneth went on:</p>
<p>“Besides, they must have sense enough to know that a sheet and
pillow-case won’t scare coloured folks to-day as they did fifty years
ago. It wasn’t hard to scare Negroes then—they’d just come out of
slavery, and believed in ghosts and spooks and all those other silly
things. But to-day⸺”</p>
<p>“I think white people are right sometimes,” broke in Bob with
conviction, “when they say education ruins a Negro. One of those times
is when you talk like that.”</p>
<p>The irony in his voice was but thinly veiled. He continued:</p>
<p>“The Southern white man boasts he knows the Negro better than anybody
else, but he knows less what the coloured man is really thinking than
the man in the moon. I’ll bet anything you say, that seven out of every
ten men in town believe that you and I and all the rest of us coloured
folks are scared to death every time we hear the word ‘Ku Klux.’ They
believe the sight of one of those fool robes’ll make us run and hide
under a bed⸺”</p>
<p> “Oh, I don’t go
quite that far,” interrupted Kenneth. “I only said I thought some of the
good white people”</p>
<p>“You can name all your ‘good white folks’ on one hand,” replied Bob
irritably. “A lot they could do if these poor white trash decide to
raise hell. Why, they’d lynch Judge Stevenson or Roy Ewing or anybody
else if they tried to stop ’em. Look what they did to Governor Slaton at
Atlanta just because he commuted the sentence of that Jew, Leo Frank!”
he added triumphantly. “A mob even went out to his house to lynch
<i>him—the governor!”</i></p>
<p>“But that was an extraordinary case,” replied Kenneth.</p>
<p>“Call it what you will, it just shows you how far they will go when
they are all stirred up. And with this Ku Klux outfit to stir them up,
there’s no telling what’ll happen.”</p>
<p>“Bob, do you really believe what you said just now about most of them
really believing Negroes will be scared by the Klan? That seems so
far-fetched.”</p>
<p>“Believe it? Of course I do. Just use your eyes and see how Negroes
fool white folks all the time. Take, for instance, old Will Hutchinson
who works for Mr. Baird. Will cuts all sorts of monkey-shines around
Baird, laughs like an idiot, and wheedles old Baird out of anything he’s
got. Baird gives it to him and then tells his friends about ‘his good
nigger Will’ and boasts that Will is one ‘darky’ he really knows. Then
Will goes home and laughs at the fool he’s made of Baird by acting like
a fool.” Bob  laughed at
the memory of many occasions on which Will had bamboozled his employer.
“And there are Negroes all over the South doing the same thing every
day!” he ended.</p>
<p>“That’s true,” admitted Kenneth, “but what ought we to do about this
meeting last night?”</p>
<p>“Do?” echoed Bob. A determined look came to his face, his teeth
clenched, his eyes narrowed until they became thin slits. “Do?” he
repeated. “If they ever bother me, I’m going to fight—and fight like
hell!”</p>
<p>Long into the night Kenneth sat alone in his office, wondering how it
was all going to turn out.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER X
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">T</span><span class="smallcaps">he</span> next day Kenneth received a letter from Jane
Phillips. In it she announced that she would arrive in Central City on
Monday morning.</p>
<p>Kenneth’s face took on a satisfied smile and deep down in his heart
there was happiness and contentment. Jane had occupied an increasingly
large portion of his thoughts ever since those wonderful ten days they
had spent together last December. Kenneth’s life had been singularly
free from feminine influence, other than that of his mother. It was not
that he was averse to such influence, but his life had been so busy that
he had had no time to spend in wandering through the Elysian fields of
love-making. There had been one girl in New York. He had met her at a
dance in Harlem. Together they had spent their Sundays and the evenings
when he was free from his duties at the hospital in wandering through
Central and Bronx Parks. Occasionally they had attended the theatre. One
night their hands had touched as they sat in the semi-darkness and
watched the tender love scene on the stage. She had not withdrawn her
hand. He sat there thrilled at the touch and had lived the character of
the make-believe hero as he made ardent love on the stage. Naturally,
the heroine was none other than the girl  who sat beside him. Afterwards, they had
ridden home atop a Fifth Avenue bus, and the whole city seemed filled
with romance. He had imagined himself at the time deeply in love. But
that tender episode had soon ended when he told her he was planning to
return to Georgia. “Kenneth!” she had exclaimed. “How can you think of
living down South again? It’s silly of you even to think of it! I could
never think of living down there where they are likely to lynch you at a
moment’s notice! It’s too barbaric, too horrible an existence to
consider even for a minute!” Kenneth had tried to show her that it
wasn’t as bad as it had been painted, that coloured people who minded
their own business never had any trouble. But she had been obdurate.
Kenneth left the house in a huff, and had never gone back again. What
silly notions women have, he had thought to himself. The reason they
talked about the South that way was because of sheer ignorance. As if he
couldn’t manage his own affairs and keep away from trouble! Humph! Well
rid of the silly creature, and he felt glad he had found out before
going in too deep.</p>
<p>But now this was different. Jane had no such absurd notions as those
girls up North had. She wasn’t the sort that couldn’t leave promenading
down Seventh Avenue in New York or State Street in Chicago or U Street
in Washington. It wasn’t that she didn’t know what it meant to live in
the North. Hadn’t she been to Atlantic City and New York and Washington
with her mother? No, Jane was just  the sort of girl who would make the right
sort of companion for him in a place like Central City. Intelligent,
with a good education, talented musically—she would make an ideal wife.
Kenneth found himself musing along in this fashion until aroused by his
mother as she called him to supper.</p>
<p>It was darned silly of him, he thought as he arose to comply, to go
along thinking like this. He and Jane had spoken no word of love when
she had been at home at Christmas. Nor had their letters been other than
those of good friends. But hadn’t she written him almost every week
since she left? She must think something of him to have done that. He
determined that as soon as he could he would skilfully direct the
conversation to the point where he could find out just where he stood.
It was time that he was thinking about settling down, anyhow. He would
be twenty-nine his next birthday—he was making money—if he acted wisely
his future was assured. Yes, he would find out how Jane felt. Both his
mother and Mamie liked Jane—and Mr. Phillips had called him “my boy”
several times lately and had repeated to him snatches of the letters
that Jane had written home. The only doubtful quantity was the attitude
of Jane herself.</p>
<p>On Monday morning Kenneth reached the railroad station long before
the train arrived. He tried to sit in the filthy little waiting-room
with the sign over the door, “FOR COLOURED,” but the air was so
oppressive that he chose rather to walk up and down the road outside the
station. At last the train came.  He walked down towards the engine where the
Jim Crow car was. It was half baggage car and half coach. A motley crowd
of laughing, shouting Negroes descended, calling out to friends and
relatives in the group of Negroes on the ground. Standing on tiptoe,
Kenneth strained his eyes to get glimpse of Jane. The windows of the
coach were too dirty to see inside. At last she appeared on the
platform, dainty, neat, and looking as though she had just emerged from
her own room, in spite of the filth and cindery foulness of the coach.
Kenneth thought of the simile of a rose springing up from a bed of
noisome and unlovely weeds as he hurried forward to help Jane with her
bags through the crowd of coloured people that flocked around the
steps.</p>
<p>Jane greeted him cordially enough, her eyes shining with pleasure at
seeing him again. Kenneth, however, felt a vague disappointment. He had
let his thoughts run riot while she had been away. So far as he was
concerned, the only things necessary were the actual asking of the
all-important question and the choosing of a wedding-day. As he followed
her to his car, he turned over in his mind just what it was that
disappointed him so in her greeting. He couldn’t put his finger on it
exactly, but she would have greeted Bob or any other man just as warmly
and he would not have felt jealous at all. Maybe she’s tired from the
ride in that dirty and noisy car? She’ll be quite different when I go
over to see her to-night, he thought.</p>
<p>He inquired regarding her trip—was it pleasant?  “Ugh, it was horrible!” she replied,
shuddering at the memory of it. “I had a Pullman as far as Atlanta, but
there I had to change to that dirty old Jim Crow car. There was a crowd
of Negroes who had three or four quarts of cheap liquor. They were
horrible. Why, they even had the nerve to offer me a drink! And the
conductor must have told everybody on the train that I was up front,
because all night long there was a constant procession of white men
passing up and down the coach looking at me in a way that made my blood
boil. I didn’t dare go to sleep, because I didn’t know what might
happen. It was awful!”</p>
<p>She sat silent as she lived over again the horror of the ride. Then,
shaking off her mood, she turned to him with a cheerful smile. “Thank
Goodness, it’s over now, and I don’t want to think of it any more than I
can help. Tell me all about yourself and what you’ve been doing and
everything,” she finished all in a breath.</p>
<p>He told her briefly what had been going on, of his plans for the
hospital, of the meeting at Reverend Wilson’s, and other items of
interest about life in Central City, until they had arrived at her home.
He waited for an invitation to come in, but in the excitement of seeing
her mother and father again, she forgot all about Kenneth. Placing her
bags on the porch, he turned and left after promising to run over for a
while that evening.</p>
<p>The time seemed to go by on dragging feet that day. It seemed as
though evening never would come.  It did at last, however, and as soon as he
finished with the last patient, he went over to Jane’s home. Refreshed
by a long rest, she greeted him clad in a dress of some filmy blue
material. They seated themselves on the porch, shaded by vines from the
eyes of passers-by. Over Kenneth there came a feeling of
contentment—life had not been easy for him and he had been denied a
confidante with whom he could discuss the perplexities he had
experienced in Central City. The talk for a time drifted from one topic
to another. Before he knew it, Kenneth was telling Jane of his
ambitions, of the plans he had made before coming back to Central City,
of the successes and failures he had met with, of his hopes for the
future. Jane listened without speaking for some time. Life among
coloured people is so intense, so earnest, so serious a problem in the
South, that never do two intelligent Negroes talk very long before the
race problem in some form is under discussion. Jane interrupted Kenneth
in the midst of his recital.</p>
<p>“Kenneth, did you really believe that you could come back here to
Central City and keep entirely away from the race problem?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know that I thought it out as carefully as that, but I hoped
to do something like that,” was his uneasy reply. He had the feeling
that she didn’t altogether approve of him. Her next words proved that
she didn’t.</p>
<p>“Well, you can’t do it. Just because your father got along all right
is no reason why you should do the same things he did. You are living in
a time  that is as
different from his as his was from his great-grandfather’s.”</p>
<p>“But⸺” he attempted to defend himself.</p>
<p>“Wait a minute until I’ve had my say,” she checked him. “Only a few
years ago they said that as soon as Negroes got property and made
themselves good citizens the race problem would be solved. They said
that only bad Negroes were ever lynched and they alone caused all the
trouble. But you just think back over the list of coloured people right
here in Central City who’ve had the most trouble during the past two
years. What do you find? That it is the Negro who has acquired more
property than the average white man, they are always picking on. Poor
whites resent seeing a Negro more prosperous than they, and they satisfy
their resentment by making it hard on that Negro. Am I right—or am I
wrong?”</p>
<p>“I suppose there is something in what you say—but what’s the answer?
You’re damned if you do—and you’re damned if you don’t!”</p>
<p>“I don’t know what the answer is—if I did, I’d certainly try to put
it into use, instead of sitting around and trying to dodge trouble. If
one of your patients had a cancer, you wouldn’t advise him to use
Christian Science in treating it, would you?”</p>
<p>Without pausing for a reply, she went on, her words pouring out in a
flood that made Kenneth feel as he did as a boy when spanked by his
mother. “No, you wouldn’t! You’d operate! And that’s just what the
coloured people and the white people of  the South have got to do. That is, those
who’ve got any sense and backbone. If they don’t, then this thing they
call the race problem is going to grow so big it’s going to consume the
South and America. It’s almost that big now.”</p>
<p>She paused for breath. Kenneth started to speak but she checked him
with her hand.</p>
<p>“I’m not through yet! I’ve been thinking over this thing for a long
time, just as every other Negro has done who’s got brains enough to do
any thinking at all. I am sick and tired of hearing all this prating
about the ‘superior race.’ Superior—humph! Kenneth, what you and all the
rest of Negroes need is to learn that you belong to a race that was
centuries old when the first white man came into the world. You’ve got
to learn that a large part of this thing they call ‘white civilization’
was made by black hands, as well as by yellow and brown and red hands,
too, besides what white hands have created. You’ve got to learn that the
Negro to-day is contributing as much of the work that makes this
civilization possible as the white race, if not more. Be proud of your
race and quit whining and cringing! You’ll never get anywhere until you
do! There, I’ve wanted to get that out of my system for a long time ever
since we talked together last Christmas. Now it’s out and I’m
through!”</p>
<p>Kenneth sat quiet. While she had been pouring forth her tirade, he
had thought of several logical arguments he could have advanced. But she
had given him no chance to utter them. Now they seemed  weak and useless. He was
resentful—what did women know about the practical problems and
difficulties of life, anyway? His anger was not abated by the
realization that Jane felt that he had been trying to avoid his
responsibility to himself and to his people—that he had been a coward.
And yet she was right in a general way in what she had said. Masking as
well as he could the chagrin he felt at her words, he told her of the
trouble Tucker and Tracy and Swann and the other share-croppers were
having, and gave her further details of the meeting at Reverend
Wilson’s.</p>
<p>She sensed the wound to his pride that she had inflicted. She did not
regret doing what she had done—on the long ride home she had determined
that she would tell him those very things as soon as she could find
opportunity—but, with a woman’s natural tenderness, she regretted the
necessity of hurting him. She put her hand over his for an instant,
touched at his dejected manner.</p>
<p>“I’m sorry, Ken, if I hurt you, but I did it because you are too fine
a man, and you’ve got too good an education, to try to dodge an issue as
plain as yours. Why, Kenneth, you’ve had it mighty soft—just think of
the thousands of coloured boys all over the South who are too poor to
get even a high-school training. You’ve never had to get down and dig
for what you’ve got—perhaps it would have been better if you had. It’s
men with your brains and education that have got to take the leadership.
You’ve got  to make
good! That’s just the reason they try to make it hard for men like
you—they know that if you ever get going, their treating the Negro as
they have has got to stop! They’re darned scared of educated Negroes
with brains—that’s why they make it hard for you!”</p>
<p>Kenneth threw out his hands, palms upward, and shrugged his
shoulders.</p>
<p>“I suppose I agree with you in theory, Jane, but what are the
practical ways of doing the things you say I ought to do? How, for
example, can I help Tracy and Tucker and all the rest of the farmers
who’re being robbed of all they earn every year?”</p>
<p>“Don’t get angry now just because I touched your masculine vanity. I
know about the share-cropping system in a general way. Tell me the facts
that were brought out at the meeting.”</p>
<p>Kenneth told her in detail the things Hiram Tucker and the others had
said. She sat in thought for a minute, her chin cupped in the palm of
her hand, her elbow resting on the arm of the chair, as she rocked back
and forth. Kenneth sat watching her in what was almost sardonic
amusement. He had been wrestling with this same problem ever since
Thursday night and was no nearer a solution than he had been then. It
would be amusing in a few minutes, after all her high-flown thoughts and
elaborate generalities about bucking the race question, when she would
be forced to admit that when it came to solving one of the practical
problems of the whole question her generalizing would be of no avail.
He was aroused by a question thrown at him suddenly by Jane.</p>
<p>“Do these folks have to buy their supplies from the landlord?”</p>
<p>“Not that I know of,” he replied. “They buy from the landlord, or the
merchant designated by the landlord, because they haven’t the money or
the credit to trade anywhere else.”</p>
<p>There followed another pause while the rocking began again.</p>
<p>“Do you remember any of the economics you learned at school?” was the
next query. He replied that he supposed he did.</p>
<p>“Have you got any books on co-operative societies?” He doubted
whether he had.</p>
<p>“Well, never mind.” She swung her chair around, facing Kenneth, and
leaned forward intently, the light from the arc-lamp in the corner
illumining her face and revealing the eager, enthusiastic look upon
it.</p>
<p>“Kenneth, why can’t those coloured people pool their money and buy
their goods wholesale and then distribute them at cost?”</p>
<p>Kenneth laughed, it must be confessed a little cheerfully, that she
had gone from one problem into the mazes of another that was just as
difficult.</p>
<p>“For the very same reason that they are in the predicament they are
in to-day. They haven’t got the money. Perhaps you can tell me where the
money to start this co-operative scheme is coming from?” </p>
<p>“That’s an easy one to answer. It’s going to come from you and papa
and three or four more of these folks here in town who can afford it!
Oh, Ken, can’t you see what a big thing you can do? There are lots of
people, white people I mean, right here in Central City, who’d be glad
to help these poor Negroes get out of debt. Papa was telling us today
about a talk he had with Judge Stevenson the other day. The Judge said
he wished there was some way to help without it making him unpopular
with the other folks here in town. Of course, the folks who are making
money off this system, the landlords and the store-keepers, won’t like
it, but you can go and talk with folks like Judge Stevenson and
Mr. Baird down at the Bank of Central City. If this first trial
succeeds—and I know it will be a success—it’ll spread all over Smith
County, and then all over Georgia, and then all over the South, and the
coloured folks will have millions of dollars that they’ve been cheated
out of before. That, Kenneth Harper, is one way you can lead, and it
won’t get you in bad with the white people at least the decent
ones—either.”</p>
<p>Kenneth began to be infected by her enthusiasm. He saw that her idea
had possibilities. But, manlike, he didn’t want to give in too soon or
too readily.</p>
<p>“There is something in what you say, Jane, but the details will have
to be worked out first before we can tell if it is a practicable idea.
I’ll think it⸺”</p>
<p>Jane interrupted him, showing that she hadn’t even been listening to
him.</p>
<p> “When are you to
meet again at Reverend Wilson’s?” she asked.</p>
<p>He told her.</p>
<p>“Well, I tell you what we’ll do. You go home and think over all the
ways we can put this idea into practice. I’ll do the same thing. And
then we’ll talk it over again to-morrow night. On Wednesday you go down
to see Judge Stevenson and see if he will draw up the papers so it’ll be
legal and binding and everything else. Then on Thursday night you can
present this as your own idea, and I’ll bet you anything you say,
they’ll take it up and you’ll be the one chosen to lead the whole
movement.”</p>
<p>After some discussion of details, Kenneth left. The more he thought
of Jane’s idea, the more it appealed to him. At any rate, she had
suggested more in half an hour than he had been able to think of in four
days. Hadn’t the co-operative societies been the backbone of the
movement to get rid of the Czar in Russia? If the Russian peasants, who
certainly weren’t as educated as the Negro in America, had made a
success of the idea, the Negro in the South ought to do it. By Jove,
they could do it! Idea after idea sprang to his mind, after the seed had
been sown by Jane, until he had visions of a vast cooperative society
not only buying but selling the millions of dollars’ worth of products
raised by the nine million Negroes of the South. And that wasn’t all!
These societies would be formed with each member paying monthly dues,
like the fraternal organizations. When enough money was in the treasury,
they would  employ the
very best lawyers money could get to take one of those cases where a
Negro had not been able to get a fair settlement with his landlord, and
make a test case of it. What if they did lose in the local court? They’d
take it to the State Supreme Court! What if they did lose even there?
They’d take it clear up to the United States Supreme Court! They were
sure to win there. Kenneth walked home with his head whirling with the
project’s possibilities. He saw a new day coming when a man in the South
would no longer be exploited and robbed just because he was black. And
when that came, lynching and everything else like it would go too. He
felt already like Matthew and Andrew and Peter and John and the other
disciples when they started out to bring the good news to the whole
world. For wasn’t he a latter-day disciple bringing a new solution and a
new hope to his people?</p>
<p>It was not until Kenneth had gone to bed that he realized that though
he had been with Jane all the evening, he had had not one minute when he
could have spoken of love to her. Musing thus, he fell asleep.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XI
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">E</span><span class="smallcaps">arly</span> the next morning Kenneth rose and rummaged
through his books until he found his old and battered text-books on
economics.</p>
<p>Into these he dipped during the intervals between patients, making
notes of ideas which seemed useful in the organization of the
co-operative society. The more he read, the more feasible the plan
seemed. Properly guided and carefully managed, there was no reason, so
far as he could see, why the society should not be a success. Eighty per
cent of the farmers of the South, white and coloured, he estimated,
suffered directly or indirectly from the present economic system. Though
his interest was in the Negro tillers of the soil, success in their case
would inevitably react favourably on the white just as oppression and
exploitation of the Negro had done more harm to white people in the
South than to Negroes. Kenneth felt the warm glow of the crusader in a
righteous cause. Already he saw a new day in the South with white and
coloured people free from oppression and hatred and prejudice—prosperous
and contented because of that prosperity. He could see a lifting of the
clouds of ignorance which hung over all the South, an awakening of the
best in all the people of the South. Thus has youth dreamed  since the beginning of time.
Thus will youth ever dream. And in those dreams rests the hope of the
world, for without them this world with all its defects would sink into
the black abyss of despair, never to rise again.</p>
<p>His work finished for the day, he went as soon as he decently could
to talk with Jane. She, too, had been at work. Eagerly they planned
between them the infinite details of so ambitious a scheme. Confidently
they discounted possible difficulties they might expect to encounter—the
opposition of the whites who were profiting from the present system, the
petty jealousies and suspicions of those who would gain most from the
success of their scheme. They realized that the Negro had been robbed so
much, both by his own people and by the whites, that he was chary of new
plans and projects. They knew he was contentious and quarrelsome. These
things seemed trivial, however, for with the natural expansiveness of
the young they felt that difficulties like these were but trifles to be
airily brushed aside.</p>
<p>Jane was not too much engrossed in their plans to notice the change
in Kenneth’s manner. She had watched him closely during the times she
had seen him since his return. He had been almost morose, his mind
divided between his work and the effort to keep to a
“middle-of-the-road” course in his relations with the whites. The
inevitable conflict within himself, the lack of decisiveness in his
daily life that he consciously developed and which was so diametrically opposite to that he used
in his profession, had begun to create a complex personality that was
far from pleasing. In a freer atmosphere Kenneth would have been a
direct, straightforward character, swift to decision and quick of
action. One cannot, however, compromise principle constantly and
consciously without bearing the marks of such conflicts.</p>
<p>His compromises were not all conscious ones, though. He believed
honestly it was wisest that he observe some sort of half-way ground
between rank cowardice and uncompromising opposition to the conditions
which existed. In doing so, he had no sense of physical or moral
timidity. He knew no Negro could yet safely advocate complete freedom
for the Negro in the South. He felt there had been improvement during
the past half-century in those conditions. He believed that in time all
of the Negro’s present problems would be solved satisfactorily. If, by
not trying to rush things, he could help in that solution, he was
content. In believing thus, Kenneth was different in no way from the
majority of intelligent Negroes in the South: temporizing with the
truth, it may be, yet of such temporizations and compromises is the life
of the Negro all over the South.</p>
<p>With the evolving of a plan which enabled him to be of help and, at
the same time, involved him in no danger of trouble with his white
neighbours, Kenneth took on an eagerness which was at marked variance with his former manner.
His eyes shone with the desire to make their plan a success. Of a tender
and sympathetic nature, almost with the gentleness of a woman, he
realized now that the burdens of his race had lain heavy upon him. He
had suffered in their suffering, had felt almost as though he had been
the victim when he read or heard of a lynching, had chafed under the
bonds which bound the hands and feet and heart and soul of his people.
But launched as he now was on a plan to furnish relief from one of the
worst of those bonds, he had changed overnight into a determined and
purposeful and ardent worker towards the goal he and Jane had set for
themselves. Jane rejoiced at the changed air of Kenneth—he seemed to
have emerged from the shell in which he had encased himself and,
womanlike, she rejoiced that he had done so through her own work.</p>
<p>So absorbed had they been in discussion of their plans that the time
had flown by as though on wings. Ten o’clock was announced by
Mr. Phillips in the room above by the dropping of his shoes, one after
the other, on the floor. Kenneth needed no second signal, he rose to go.
Jane went to the door with him.</p>
<p>“Kenneth, you’re entirely different from the way you were yesterday.
I’m so glad. …”</p>
<p>The next morning he called on Judge Stevenson. The Judge’s office was
above the Bon Ton Store in a two-story brick building on Lee Street.
Kenneth  climbed the
flight of dingy, dusty stairs which bore alternately on the vertical
portions tin signs inscribed:</p>
<div class="sign">
Richad P. Stevenson, Attorney-at-Law
</div>
<div class="center">
and
</div>
<div class="sign">
Dr. J. C. Carpenter, Dentist.
</div>
<p>The judge’s office was at the head of the stairs and in it Kenneth
found the old lawyer seated near the window, his coat off, and in his
mouth the long, thin, villainous-looking cigar without which few persons
in Central City ever remembered seeing him, though none had ever seen
one of them lighted. He chewed on it ruminatively when in repose. When
engaged in an argument, either in or out of a courtroom, and especially
when opposition caused his choleric temper to be aroused, he chewed
furiously as though he would have enjoyed treating his enemy of the
moment in similar fashion. He was tall and thickset, his snow-white hair
brushed straight back from his forehead like the mane of a lion. Skin
reddened by exposure to sun and wind, bushy eyebrows from under which
gleamed fiery eyes that could shift in an instant from twinkling good
humour to flashing indignation or anger, thin nose and ample mouth, his
face was one that would command respect or at least attention in almost
any gathering. He wore loosely fitting, baggy clothes that draped his
ample figure with a gracefulness that added to his distinguished
appearance. Many thought he resembled at first glance that famous
Kentuckian,  Henry
Watterson, and indeed he did bear an unmistakable likeness to “Marse
Henry.”</p>
<p>The judge’s life had been a curious combination of contradictions. He
had fought valiantly in the Confederate army as a major, serving under
“Stonewall” Jackson, whose memory he worshipped second only to that of
his wife, who had died some ten years before. He bore a long scar,
reminder of the wound that had laid him low during the battle of
Atlanta. His mode of brushing his hair back was adopted to cover the
mark, but when he talked, as he loved to do, of his martial experiences,
he would always, at the same time in the narrative, brush, with one
sweep of his hand, the hair down over his forehead and reveal the jagged
scar of which he was inordinately proud.</p>
<p>With the end of the Civil War, he had reconciled himself to the
result though it had meant the loss of most of his wealth. He harboured
little bitterness towards the North, unlike most of his comrades in arms
who never were willing to forgo any opportunity to vent their venomous
hatred of their conquerors. Judge Stevenson had counselled against such
a spirit. So vigorously had he done it, he had alienated most of those
who had been his closest friends. Following a speech he had delivered at
one of the reunions of Confederate veterans in which he urged his
comrades at least to meet half-way the overtures of friendliness from
the North, he had been denounced from the floor of the convention as a
“Yankee-lover,” and threatened with violence. Judge Stevenson with
flashing eye and belligerent  manner had jumped to his feet, offered to
fight any man, or any ten men, who thought him guilty of treachery to
the cause of the Confederacy, and when none accepted the challenge,
denounced them as cowards and quit the convention.</p>
<p>He had hoped that, with the passing on, one by one, of the
unreconstructed veterans of the Confederacy, a newer and less embittered
generation, with no personal memories of the gall of defeat, would right
things. Instead had come the rise of the poor whites with none of the
culture and refinement of the old Southern aristocracy, a nation of
petty minds and morals, vindictive, vicious, dishonest, and stupid.
Lacking in nearly all the things that made the old South, at least the
upper crust of it, the most civilized section of America at that time,
he saw his friends and all they stood for inundated by this flood of
crudeness and viciousness, until only a few remained left high and dry
like bits of wreckage from a foundered ship cast up on the shore to rot
away, while all around them raged this new regime, no longer poor in
purse but eternally impoverished in culture and civilizing influences.
On these the judge spat his contempt and he poured upon their
unconcerned heads the vials of his venom and wrath.</p>
<p>The second devastating blow he suffered was the succumbing, one by
one, of his children to the new order. Nancy, his eldest daughter, had
run away from home and married a merchant whose wealth had been gained
through the petty thievery of padding accounts and other sharp practices
on poorer  whites and
Negroes. Mary Ann, his other daughter, whom he loved above all others of
his children, had fallen victim to an unfortunate love affair with a
dashing but worthless son of their next-door neighbour. She had died in
giving birth to her child, which, fortunately, the judge thought, had
been born dead. His son had “gone in for politics.” He had been
successful, as success was measured by the present-day South, but in his
father’s eyes, judged by the uncompromising standards of that member of
an older and nobler generation, he had sunk to levels of infamy from
which he could never recover.</p>
<p>The crowning misfortune dealt the judge by an unkind fate was the
loss of his gentle, kindly wife. She had uncomplainingly borne their
misfortunes one after another, had calmed and soothed her husband’s
irascible tantrums, had been a haven to which he could come and find
repose when buffeted by a world which he did not and could not
understand. As long as she lived, he had been able to bear up despite
the bitter disappointments life had dealt him. He had gone away to try a
case in a near-by county, had returned after a two days’ absence and
found her with a severe cold and fever.</p>
<p>For three weeks he did not leave her bedside, drove away in anger the
trained nurse Dr. Bennett brought to the house, ministered gently to his
wife’s every need, and held her in his arms as she breathed her last
breath. Frantic at this last and most crushing blow, he cursed the
doctor, though Dr. Bennett had done all he could in his bungling way,
cursed God,  cursed
everything and everybody he could think of in his grief. He never
recovered from this loss. His hair rapidly became white, he neglected
his profession and sat by the hour, his eyes half closed, dreaming of
his dead wife. …</p>
<p>Had he chosen to adapt himself to the new order, he could have made
money. This, however, he refused to do. He boasted proudly that never
had he cheated any man or been a party to any transaction from which he
emerged with any stain on his honour. Friend he was to all in his
gentle, kindly manner—a relic of a day that had passed. …</p>
<p>He started, roused from one of his usual reveries, when Kenneth
knocked on the open door. The gentle breezes of late spring stirred the
mane of white hair as he brought his chair to the floor with a
thump.</p>
<p>“Come in, Ken, come right in.” He welcomed Kenneth heartily, though
in accordance with the Southern custom he did not offer to shake hands
with his visitor. “How’s your maw? Heard you’re doing right well since
you been back. Mighty glad to hear it, because yo’ daddy set a heap by
you.”</p>
<p>Kenneth assured him he was progressing fairly well, told him his
mother was well, and answered the innumerable questions the judge asked
him. He knew that these were inevitable and must be answered before the
judge would talk on any matter of business. After a few minutes of the
desultory and perfunctory questions and answers, Kenneth told, when
asked, the purpose of his visit. Chair tilted back again, elbows resting
on the arms of the chair, fingers placed end to end, and his chin resting
on the natural bridge thus formed, the judge listened to Kenneth’s
recital of his plan without comment other than an occasional
non-committal grunt.</p>
<p>“… And what I would like from you, Judge Stevenson, is, first, do you
think the plan will work, and, second, will you draw up the articles of
incorporation and whatever other legal papers we need?” Kenneth ended.
As an afterthought he added:</p>
<p>“You see, we want to do the job legally and above board, so there
won’t be any misunderstanding of our motives.”</p>
<p>For a long time Judge Stevenson said nothing, nor did he give any
indication that he was aware Kenneth had stopped speaking. In fact he
seemed oblivious even of Kenneth’s presence. Knowing better than to
interrupt him, Kenneth awaited somewhat anxiously the judge’s opinion.
When the silence had lasted nearly five minutes, a vague alarm began to
creep over Kenneth. Suppose the judge wasn’t as friendly towards
coloured people as he had supposed? A word from him could start serious
trouble before they got started. He wondered if he had acted wisely in
revealing so much of their plans. He felt sure he had done wrong when he
saw a look of what appeared to be anger pass over the judge’s face.</p>
<p>At last the old lawyer cleared his throat, his usual preliminary to
speech. But when he did talk he began on another subject.</p>
<p>“What’re the folks out your way saying about these  Kluxers? Any of you getting
worried about these fools parading ’round like a bunch of damn
fools?”</p>
<p>“To tell you the truth, Judge, I don’t really know yet what the
coloured people are thinking.” He felt that on this subject he could
speak frankly to the judge, as he was too sensible a man to take much
stock in the antics of the Klan. Yet, he was not too sure—coloured
people must always keep a careful watch on their tongues when talking to
white people in the South.</p>
<p>“You ain’t getting scared out there, are you?” the judge pressed the
point.</p>
<p>“No, I wouldn’t call it scared. Most of those with whom I’ve talked
don’t want any trouble with anybody—they want to attend to their own
business and be let alone. But if they are attacked, I’m afraid there
will be considerable trouble and somebody will get hurt.” He paused,
then went on: “And that somebody won’t be entirely composed of Negroes,
either.”</p>
<p>“I reckon you’re right, Ken. These fools don’t know they’re playing
with dynamite.” His voice took on a querulous tone. “We’ve been getting
along all right here, ‘cept when some of these po’ whites out of the
mill or from the tu’pentine camps or some bad nigras tank up on bad
liquor or moonshine.” He did not say “Negro” nor yet the opprobrious
“nigger,” but struck somewhere between the two—“nigra.” “And now these
fools are just stirring up trouble Lord knows where it’ll end.”</p>
<p>He ran his hand through his hair—a favourite trick of his when
excited, and paced up and down the room.</p>
<p> “I’ve been telling
some of the boys they’d better stay away from that fool business of
gallivanting around with a pillow-slip over their heads. They talk about
being against bootleggers and men runing around with loose
women—humph!—every blamed bootlegger and blind tiger and whoremaster in
town rushed into the Klan ’cause they know’d that was the only way they
could keep from getting called up on the carpet! A fine bunch they
are!”</p>
<p>The judge spat disgustedly.</p>
<p>“Now about this plan you got—have you thought about the chances of
your being misunderstood? Suppose some of these ornery whites get it
into their heads you’re trying to start trouble between the races.
What’re you going to do then?” he asked.</p>
<p>“That’s just why we want to do the job right,” answered Kenneth. “We
want to do everything legally so there can’t be any wrong ideas about
the society. I know every time coloured people start forming any kind of
an organization besides a church or a burial society, there are white
people who begin to get suspicious and think that Negroes are organizing
to start some mischief. That’s why we want you and the other good white
people to know all about our plans from the start.”</p>
<p>“I ain’t trying to discourage you none,” replied Judge Stevenson
doubtfully, “but do you think you are wise in starting coloured folks to
thinking about organizing when this Klan’s raising hell all over the
South?”</p>
<p> “How else are we
going to do anything?” asked Kenneth. “Farmers have been robbed so long
they are getting tired of it. If something isn’t done, there’s going to
be lots more trouble than a society like ours can possibly cause. This
share-cropping business causes more trouble than any other thing that’s
done to Negroes. Lynching is mighty bad, but after all only a few
Negroes are lynched a year, while thousands are robbed every year of
their lives.”</p>
<p>“That’s so. That’s so,” agreed the judge, but the doubt had not been
dispelled from his voice nor removed from his face. He removed his cigar
from his mouth, viewed its mangled appearance through much chewing upon
it, threw it with an expression of disgust out of the window, narrowly
missing a man passing in the street below. He chuckled as he placed a
fresh cigar in his mouth.</p>
<p>“’Taint no harm in trying, though,” he said, half to himself.</p>
<p>“Besides, our plan is to enlist the support of every white man in the
county who stands for something,” went on Kenneth, eager to gain the old
man as a staunch ally. “We know there’ll be opposition from some of the
landlords and merchants and bankers who are making money off this
system, but we figure there are enough decent white people here to help
us through. …”</p>
<p>“Mebbe so. Mebbe so,” replied the judge, though there was a distinct
note of doubt in his voice now. “I wouldn’t be too sure, though. I
wouldn’t be too sure.”</p>
<p> “But, Judge⸺”
interrupted Kenneth. The judge silenced him with a movement of his
hand.</p>
<p>“Ken, have you ever thought out what a decent white man goes through
with in a town like Central City? Have you thought what he has to put up
with all over the South? There ain’t a whole lot of them, but just
figure what’d happen to a white man to-day who tried to do anything
about cleaning up this rotten state of affairs we got here. Why, he’d be
run out of town, if he wasn’t lynched!”</p>
<p>“But, Judge,” began Kenneth again, “take lynching, for example. You
know, and I know, and everybody in the South knows that if a Negro is
arrested charged with criminal assault on a white woman, if he’s guilty,
there isn’t one chance in a million of his going free. Why don’t they
bring them to trial and execute them legally instead of hanging and
burning them?”</p>
<p>“Why? Why?” The judge repeated the interrogative as though it were a
word he had never heard before. “You know, and so do I and all the rest
of us here in the South, that nine out of ten cases where these trifling
women holler and claim they been raped, they ain’t been no rape. They
just got caught and they yelled rape to save their reputations. And they
lynch the nigra to hush the matter up.”</p>
<p>Kenneth was amazed at the old man. Not amazed at what he said, for
that is common knowledge in the South. He was astounded that even so
liberal a man as the judge should frankly admit that which is denied in
public but known to be true. He hesitated to  press the inquiry further, and thought it
expedient to shift the conversation away from such dangerous ground.</p>
<p>“Why don’t men like yourself speak out against the things you know
are wrong, Judge?”.</p>
<p>“What would happen to us if we did? Count me out ‘cause I’m so old I
couldn’t do much. But take right here in Central City the men I’ve
talked with just like I’m talking to you. How many of them could say
what they really want to? I don’t mean on the race question. I mean on
any question—religion, politics—oh—anything at all. Suppose Roy Ewing or
any other white man here said he was tired of voting the Democratic
ticket and was going to vote Republican or Socialist. Suppose he decided
he didn’t believe in the Virgin Birth or that all bad folks were burned
eternally in a lake of fire and brimstone after they died. If they
didn’t think he was crazy, they’d stop trading with him and all the
womenfolks would run from Roy’s wife and daughter like they had the
smallpox. That’s the hell of it, Ken. These po’ white trash stopped
everybody from talking against lynching nigras, and they’ve stopped us
from talking about anything. And far’s I can see, things’re getting
worse every day.”</p>
<p>“Couldn’t you organize those white people who think like you do?”
asked Kenneth.</p>
<p>“No, that ain’t much use either. It all goes back to the same
root—self-interest—how much is it going to cost me? I tell you, Ken, the
most tragic figure I know is the white man in the South who  wants to be decent. This here
system of lynching and covering up their lynching with lying has grown
so big that any man who tries to tackle it is beat befo’ he starts.
Specially in the little towns. Now in Atlanta there’s some folks can
speak out and say most anything they please, but here⸺” The old lawyer
threw out his hands in a gesture of hopelessness.</p>
<p>“Why can’t the South see where their course is leading them?” asked
Kenneth. “Suppose there wasn’t a white man in the South who was
interested in the Negro. Suppose every white man hated every Negro who
lived. Why couldn’t they see even then that they are doing more harm to
themselves than they could ever do to the Negro? With all its rich
natural resources, with its fertile soil and its wonderful climate, the
South is farther behind in civilization than any other part of the
United States—or the world, for that matter. Aren’t they ever going to
see how they’re hurting themselves by trying to keep the Negro
down?”</p>
<p>“That’s just it,” replied the judge. “A man starts out practising
cheating in a petty way, and before he knows it he’s crooked all the way
through. He starts being mean part of the time, and soon he’s mean all
over. Or he tries being kind and decent, and he turns out to be pretty
decent. It’s just like a man drinking liquor—first thing he knows, he’s
liable to be drunk all the time.”</p>
<p>The judge shifted his cigar to a corner of his mouth and let fly a
stream of tobacco juice from the  other corner, every drop landing squarely
in the box of sawdust some ten feet away. He went on:</p>
<p>“That’s just what’s the matter with the South. She’s been brutal and
tricky and deceitful so long in trying to keep the nigras down, she
couldn’t be decent if she tried. If acting like this was going to get
them anywhere, there might be some reason in it all, but they’ve shut
their eyes, they refuse to see that nigras like you ain’t going to be
handled like yo’ daddy and folks like him were.”</p>
<p>“What are we going to do—what can we do?” asked Kenneth. Never had he
suspected that even so fine a man as Judge Stevenson had thought things
through as their conversation had indicated. He felt the situation was
not entirely hopeless when men like the judge felt and talked as he did.
Perhaps they were the leaven that would affect the lump of ignorance and
viciousness that was the South.</p>
<p>“What are we going to do?” echoed the elder man. “God knows—I don’t!
Mebbe the lid will blow off some day—then there would be hell to pay!
One thing’s going to help, and that’s nigras pulling up stakes and going
North. When some of these white folks begin to see their fields going to
seed, they’ll begin to realize how much they need the nigra—just like
some of ’em are seeing already.”</p>
<p>“But are they seeing it in the right way?” asked Kenneth. “Instead of
trying to make things better so Negroes are willing to stay in the
South, they’re trying more oppressive methods than ever before. They’re
beating up labour agents, charging them a  thousand dollars for licences, lynching
more Negroes, and robbing them more than ever.”</p>
<p>“Oh, they’ll be fools enough until the real pinch comes. Far’s I can
see, instead of stopping nigras from going North, them things are
hurrying them up. Wait till it hits their pocket-books hard. Then the
white people’ll get some sense.”</p>
<p>“Let’s hope so,” was Kenneth’s rejoinder as he rose to go. “It’s been
mighty comforting to talk like this with you, Judge. Things don’t seem
so hopeless when we’ve got friends like you.”</p>
<p>“’Tain’t nothing. Nothing at all,” replied the judge. “Just like to
talk with somebody’s got some sense. It’s a pity you’re coloured, Ken,
you got too much sense to be a nigra.”</p>
<p>Kenneth laughed.</p>
<p>“From all we’ve been saying, a coloured man’s got to have some sense
or else he’s in a mighty poor fix nowadays.”</p>
<p>He did not resent the old man’s remark, for he knew the judge could
not understand that he was much more contented as a member of a race
that was struggling upward than he would have been as one of that race
that expended most of its time and thought and energy in exploiting and
oppressing others. The judge followed him to the door promising to draw
up the necessary legal documents for the co-operative society. When
Kenneth broached the subject of payment, the old man waved his hand
again in protest.</p>
<p>“Ain’t got long to live, so’s I got to do what little  I can to help. ’Tain’t much I
can do, but I’ll help all I can.”</p>
<p>Thanking him, Kenneth started to leave, but the judge recalled him
after he had reached the hallway. “Ken, just consider all I said as
between us. Can’t tell what folks’d say if they knew I been running on
like this.”</p>
<p>There was almost a note of pleading in his voice. Kenneth assured the
judge their conversation would be treated as confidential. As he walked
home, he reflected on the anomalous position the judge and men like him
occupied, hemmed in, oppressed, afraid to call their souls their own,
creatures of the Frankenstein monster their own people had created which
seemed about to rise up and destroy its creators. No, he said to
himself, he would much rather be a Negro with all his problems than be
made a moral coward as the race problem had made the white people of the
South.</p>
<p>The judge stood at the window, dim with the dust of many months, and
gazed at Kenneth’s broad back as he swung down Lee Street. Long after he
had disappeared, the old man stood there, chewing on the cigar which by
now was a mangled mass of wet tobacco. At last he turned away and
resumed his seat in the comfortable old chair where Kenneth had found
him. He shook his head slowly, doubtfully, and murmured, half to
himself, half to the dusty, empty room:</p>
<p>“Hope this thing turns out all right. Hope he don’t get in no
trouble. But even if he does, there’ll  be more like him coming on—and they got too
much sense to stand for what nigras been made to suffer. Lord, if we
only had a few white folks who had some sense …”</p>
<p>It was almost a prayer.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XII
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">F</span><span class="smallcaps">rom</span> Judge Stevenson’s office Kenneth went
directly to tell Jane of the interview. So absorbed was he in
contemplation of the wider vision of the problem he was attacking which
the judge’s words had given him, he forgot to telephone her to ask if it
was agreeable for him to call at so unconventional an hour. He found her
clad in a bungalow apron busily cleaning house and singing as she
worked.</p>
<p>They sat on the steps of the back porch while he told her all that
had been said. Taken out of his preoccupation with his own affairs,
Kenneth had shaken off his negative air and now he talked convincingly
of their plans. Jane said nothing until he had finished.</p>
<p>“That’s fine!” she exclaimed when he had ended. “Even if Judge
Stevenson is doubtful of how much we can accomplish, we can do
something. Now all that remains is for you to present your plan⸺”</p>
<p>“Not mine, yours,” he corrected</p>
<p>“No, it will have to be yours,” she answered. “You know how folks are
in the South—they think all that women can do is cook and keep house and
bear children. If you want the thing to go, it’ll be best to make them
think it’s your scheme.”</p>
<p> Kenneth demurred,
but in vain. She would have it no other way. She felt no jealousy. She
knew of the peculiar Southern prejudice which relegated women to a
position of eternal inferiority. Though she felt the injustice of such
arbitrary assumptions, she did not resent it. Like all women, coloured
women, she realized that most of the spirit of revolt against the wrongs
inflicted on her race had been born in the breasts of coloured women.
She knew, and in that knowledge was content, that most of the work of
the churches and societies and other organizations which had done so
much towards welding the Negro into a racial unit had been done by
women. It was amusing to see men, vain creatures that they are, preen
themselves on what they had done. It was not so amusing when they, in
their pride, sought to belittle what the women had done and take all the
credit to themselves. Oh, well, what did it matter? The end was the
all-important thing—not the means. Jane appreciated Kenneth’s
thoughtfulness and felt no tinge of jealousy if her idea—their
idea—should be a success in forming societies to help poor, helpless
Negroes out of the morass in which they were bogged. Of such material
has the coloured woman been made by adversity.</p>
<p>She watched Kenneth as he told her the developments of which he had
thought, the details he had worked out. Each day, it seemed to her,
Kenneth became more keenly alive each day saw a brighter sparkle in his
eyes, a springiness in his step that had not been there before. There
are many men who  could
willingly have followed—and do follow—without revolt or much inward
conflict a course of self-abnegation such as he had mapped out for
himself. Not so, however, with Kenneth. He was almost puritanical in his
devotion to the fixed moral code he had worked out for his own guidance.
It was not a superimposed one, but an integral part of his very being.
Nothing could have induced him to surrender to deliberate malice or
guile or what he considered dishonesty or cowardice. His was a simple
nature, free from the barnacles of pettiness which encumber the average
man. He was not essentially religious in the accepted meaning of the
word. He believed, though he had not thought much on the subject of
religion, so immersed had he been in his beloved profession, in some
sort of a God. Of what form or shape this being was, he did not know. He
had more or less accepted the beliefs his environment had forced upon
him. He doubted the malignity of the God described by most of the
ministers he had heard. As a matter of fact, he was rather repelled and
nauseated by the religion of the modern Church. Narrow, intolerant of
contrary opinion, prying into the lives and affairs of its communicants
with which it had no concern, its energies concentrated on raising money
and not on saving souls, of little real help to intelligent people to
enable them to live more useful lives here on earth, and centering
instead on a mysterious and problematical life after death, he felt the
Church of Jesus Christ had so little of the spirit of the Christ that he
had little  patience
with it. He went to services more as a perfunctory duty than through any
deep-rooted belief that he could get any real help from them in meeting
the problems of life he faced. He bore the Church no grudge or ill
will—it simply was not a factor in the life of to-day as he saw it.</p>
<p>Nevertheless he had a deep religious or, better, an ethical sense.
When he was about to return to Central City, that ethical code had been
adapted to conditions he expected to find there. It was galling to him
to accept a position of subserviency to things he knew were unjust and
wrong, tacitly to admit his inferiority to men to whom he knew he was
superior in morals and training and in all the decencies of life, solely
because of the mere accident that they had been born with skins which
were white and he with one which was not white. When doubts had assailed
him, he had quieted or salved his conscience by the constant reminder
that he was following such a course for greater eventual good. On his
return, when he had found a course such as he had charted for himself
was becoming increasingly difficult, he had refused to face the facts
his mind told him were true and had plunged more deeply into his work,
seeking in it an opiate. Only when Jane had confronted him with the
utter futility of his course and had, in effect, accused him of being a
moral quitter in considering only himself and blinding himself to the
far greater problems of those so closely bound to him by race, did his
eyes begin to be opened. Wearied of illusory hopes of peace through
compromise,  he had
grasped the tangible reality of work towards a definite end, through
means which he had created and which he would guide and develop as far
as he could. With the buoyant hopes and ambitions of the young,
especially of the very young, he felt that he had already created that
which he was hoping to create.</p>
<p>Like a traveller who has lost his way in a dense forest, an
indefinable restlessness had pervaded his being and made him sorely
discontented. Now that he had found what seemed the path which would
lead him into the clear, open air, the clouds of doubt and perplexity
were cleared away just as the bright sun, as it bursts forth after a
shower in spring, drives away the moisture in the air.</p>
<p>They sat there in the warm sunlight of early summer, dreaming and
planning all the great things they were going to accomplish. It had
rained earlier in the morning and from the ground rose a misty vapour.
The odour of warm wet earth mingled with the aroma of the flowers. Hens
scratched industriously for food to feed the cluster of tiny chicks
around them. A cat sneaking along the fence slyly crept near. With a
great fluttering of wings and raucous cackling, the hens drove him away.
From afar off came the voices of two women, resting for a minute from
their morning toil, gossiping with much loud laughter. It was a
peaceful, restful scene. To Kenneth as he sat there, problems seemed
remote and out of place in that place where all was so calm.</p>
<p>He looked at the girl by his side. It seemed  Jane had never looked more charming clad in
her bungalow apron, dust-cloth in hand. He was glad she had made no
silly, conventional excuses because of her dress. The usual girl would
have tried to rush indoors and change her dress. Most women, he
reflected, looked like angels at night, but in the harsh glare of
morning looked terrible. Jane seemed to him to be even prettier without
powder or the soft light of evening. He felt a thrill of pleasure as he
saw her dusting furniture in their home.</p>
<p>They rose as Kenneth started to leave. Jane was telling him of some
trivial incident, but Kenneth heard nothing of what she said. He turned
towards her suddenly.</p>
<p>She divined his intentions—she could almost feel the words that were
on his lips. Quickly wishing him success in the meeting to be held that
next evening, she bade him good-bye.</p>
<p>After Kenneth had gone, Jane sat for some time struggling with the
problem she was facing. What was she to do? As a little girl she had
loved Kenneth with a simple, childlike love though he, with the infinite
difference of eight years of age, had paid no attention to her. She was
not at all sure now of the nature of her feelings towards him. She liked
him, it is true, but when it came to anything deeper than that, she was
not so certain. She had been told, and had always believed, that love
came as a blinding, searing, devastating passion which swept everything
before it. She felt none of this passion and  experienced no bit of that complete
surrender which she had believed was a part of the thing called love.
Jane was much in the position of the sinner on the mourner’s bench who
had been told that when he became a Christian, angels and all sorts of
heavenly apparitions would miraculously appear before him, and, seeing
none, feels that he is being cheated.</p>
<p>Jane had seen in Kenneth’s eyes that soon he would make some sort of
declaration of his love. What was she going to say? She did not know.
…</p>
<p>So pleasant had it been sitting there in the warm sunlight talking
with Jane, Kenneth had forgotten the time. Entering his office, he found
half a dozen patients waiting somewhat impatiently for him. As he
entered his private office, he heard old Mrs. Amos, in her chronic
quarrelsomeness, mutter:</p>
<p>“Dat’s just what I allus say. Soon’s a nigger begin to get up in the
world, he thinks hisself better’n us po’ folks. Thinks he can treat us
any way he please.”</p>
<p>Kenneth laughed and, with a few bantering words, mollified the
irascible old woman. The coloured doctor has to be a diplomat as well as
a physician—he must never allow the humblest of his patients to gain the
impression that he thinks himself better than they. Of all races that
make up the heterogenous populace of America, none is more self-critical
than the Negro—its often unjust and carping criticism of those who stand
out from the mass serves as an excellent antidote for undue pride and
conceit. …</p>
<p>The next evening the seven men met again at Mr.  Wilson’s. Kenneth stopped by for
Mr. Phillips, but he did not see Jane. The Reverend Stewart, Tucker,
Tracy, Swann, and Mr. Wilson sat awaiting them. Tom Tracy was
exhibiting, somewhat proudly it seemed, a note he had found tacked to
his door that morning. It was crudely lettered in red ink on a
cheap-quality paper. It read:</p>
<div class="crude">
NIGGER! YOU’VE BEN TALKING TOO DAM MUCH! IF YOU DON’T SHUT YOUR MOUTH WE
WILL SHUT IT FOR YOU AND FOR GOOD! LET THIS BE A WARNING TO YOU. NEXT
TIME WE WILL ACT!
</div>
<div class="crude alignright">
K. K. K.
</div>
<p>Beneath the three initials was a crude skull and cross-bones. Though
all seven of the men knew that the warning was not to be disregarded,
that it might possibly portend a serious attempt on the life of Tracy,
that any or all of them present might receive a similar grim reminder of
the ill will of the hooded band, there was a complete absence of fear as
they sat around the table and conjectured as to the possible result of
the warning. The calmness with which they accepted the omen of trouble
would probably have amazed the senders of the warning. Perhaps the
clearest indication of how little the South realizes the changes that
have taken place in the Negro is this recrudescence of the Klan. Where
stark terror followed in the wake of the Klan rides of the seventies,
the net result of similar rides to-day is a more determined union of Negroes against all that
the Klan stands for, tinctured with a mild amusement at the Klan’s
grotesque antics. It was fortunate for Kenneth, in a measure, that Tracy
had received the threat on the day it came. With such a reminder before
them, the seven felt there was greater need than ever before for
organization for mutual protection.</p>
<p>They discussed means of protecting Tracy, but he assured them he was
amply able to take care of himself. He had sent his parents that day to
stay with friends until the trouble had blown over, telling them nothing
of the warning, as he did not want them to be worried by it. Two of his
friends had agreed to stay with him at night. He was well supplied with
ammunition and was sure the three of them could successfully repel any
attack that might be made upon him. Such trying periods have happened to
Negroes so frequently in the South that they have become inured to them.
The subject was soon dropped.</p>
<p>Then Kenneth presented his plan. He outlined in detail how the
society should be organized. He proposed that the first lodge be formed
at Ashland, then gradually spread until there was a branch in every
section of the county. They left until later the problem of extending
the society’s activities to other parts of Georgia and the neighbouring
States. Each member would be required to pay an initiation fee of one
dollar. Men would pay monthly dues of fifty cents each, women
twenty-five. The sums thus secured were to be pooled. Half of the amount
 was to purchase
supplies like sugar, flour, shoes, clothing, fertilizer, seeds, farm
implements, and the other things needed to satisfy the simple wants of
the members. To make up any deficit, Kenneth and Mr. Phillips agreed to
lend money that the supplies might be purchased for cash, effecting
thereby a considerable saving. The other half was to be used as the
nucleus of a defence fund with which a test case might be made in the
courts when any member was unable to secure a fair settlement with his
landlord.</p>
<p>Similarly were other details presented and discussed and adopted or
modified. A name had to be chosen. Kenneth would have preferred a short,
simple one, but here he was overruled. That it might appeal to the
simple, illiterate class to which most of the prospective members
belonged, a sonorous, impressive name was necessary. They decided on
“The National Negro Farmers’ Co-operative and Protective League.”</p>
<p>At first the plan was considered a bit too ambitious, but as Kenneth
warmed up to it in presenting it as simply and forcefully as he could,
the objections, one by one, were overcome. One change, however, had to
be made. It came from Hiram Tucker.</p>
<p>“Ain’t you figgerin’ on havin’ no signs and passwords and a grip like
dey have with de Odd Fellers and de Masons and de Knights of Pythias?”
he asked.</p>
<p>“I didn’t think that was necessary,” replied Kenneth.</p>
<p> “Well, lemme tell
you somethin’, son. Ef you figgers on gettin’ a big passel of these
cullud folks ’round here to jine in with us, you’ll have t’ have some
‘ficials with scrumptious names, and passwords and grips. Dese here
ign’ant folks needs somethin’ like dat to catch their ’magination. If
you put dat in, they’ll jine like flies ’round molasses.”</p>
<p>Kenneth had hoped that the society would be run on a dignified and
intelligent basis, but he realized that Hiram Tucker might be right
after all. Most of the share-croppers were ignorant—at least,
illiterate. Mere show and pomp and colourful uniforms and high-sounding
names played a large part in their lives, which, after all, wasn’t so
much a racial as a human trait. Hadn’t the Ku Klux Klan outdone, in
absurdity of name and ceremony and dress, anything that Negroes had ever
even thought of?</p>
<p>This question was disposed of, after more discussion, by the adoption
of Hiram Tucker’s suggestion. Kenneth was appointed to work out the
details of organization, and the meeting adjourned. The National Negro
Farmer’s Co-operative and Protective League had been born.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XIII
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">T</span><span class="smallcaps">he</span> days that followed were full of interest for
Kenneth and Jane. The constitution and bylaws were drafted and approved
and sent to Atlanta to be printed by a coloured printing firm. Judge
Stevenson prepared the articles of incorporation and did the necessary
legal work, still refusing any pay for his services. Kenneth had offered
to pay him out of his own pocket, but the judge told him: “Keep your
money, Ken, I c’n wait. I’m gettin’ along in years now and I’ve been
hopin’ that this problem that’s cursin’ the South would be settled befo’
I passed on. But what with these damn fool Kluxers kickin’ up hell
’round here, I don’t know whether I’ll see it or not. Your idea may do
some good—I don’t know whether it will or not—but if I c’n help, let me
know.” Kenneth thanked him and had been immeasurably encouraged by the
old man’s attitude.</p>
<p>As soon as the literature they had ordered was received, the first
meeting was called by Tucker and Tracy at Ashland. Jane and her father
drove out with Kenneth, who was to present the plan to the group
gathered. The meeting was held at a little wooden church, whitewashed on
the outside, and furnished within only with rude benches. On the walls
were one or two highly coloured lithographs of religious subjects. The hall seated not more
than two hundred and was crowded to capacity. Even the windows were
comfortably filled by those unable to obtain a seat on the floor. The
illumination was furnished by four kerosene lamps attached to the walls,
two on each side.</p>
<p>Hiram Tucker acted as chairman, while Tom Tracy took minutes of the
meeting. After a preliminary announcement of the purpose of the
gathering by the chairman, Kenneth was called upon to outline the plan
that had been proposed. At the outset, having had no experience as a
public speaker, he stumbled and faltered and knew not what to do with
his hands. After a few minutes he jammed them into the side pockets of
his coat and, warming to his subject, swung into a clear, forceful, and
convincing recital of the purpose and possibilities of the co-operative
societies. His enthusiasm became infectious. His audience began to share
his zeal. Humble and lowly folks, their vision limited by the life they
led, they had the feeling, as Kenneth talked on, of having been face to
face with a blank wall of immeasurable height and impenetrable
thickness. Under the spell of his words they seemed to see the
miraculous opening of a door in this wall. Hope, which had been crushed
to earth year after year by disappointing settlements for their labour,
began to mount.</p>
<p>As for Kenneth, he had forgotten his self-imposed inhibitions and
prohibitions. Gone was the hesitation and doubt. He had seen a light
where he had thought there was no light. His voice rang true and  firm, and there was a look of
eager earnestness on his face as the pale, flickering light from the oil
lamps illumined it.</p>
<p>He finished with a flourish so dear to the hearts of coloured
audiences. It was what the old-style coloured preacher used to call “de
’rousements.”</p>
<p>“You husbands and sons and brothers, three years ago you were called
on to fight for liberty and justice and democracy! Are you getting it?”
He was answered by a rousing “No!” “What are you going to do about it?”
he demanded. “Single-handed, you can do nothing! Organized, you can
strike a blow for freedom, not only for yourselves but for countless
generations of coloured children yet unborn! No race in all history has
ever had its liberties and rights handed to it on a silver platter—such
rights can come only when men are willing to struggle and sacrifice and
work and die, if need be, to obtain them! I call on you here to-night to
join in this movement which shall in time strike from our hands and feet
the shackles which bind them, that we may move on as a race together to
that greater freedom which we have so long desired and which so long has
been denied us! Only slaves and cowards whine and beg! Men and women
stand true and firm and struggle onwards and upwards until they reach
their goal!” He paused impressively while the audience sat mute. He
looked over the assemblage for a full minute and then demanded in a
ringing voice: “What do you choose to be slaves or men?”</p>
<p>He sat down. A salvo of applause greeted him.  A Daniel had arisen to lead them! Kenneth
took on a new importance and affection in the eyes and minds of his
hearers. He had heard their Macedonian cry and answered it.</p>
<p>As he mopped his brow, Kenneth felt that he had made a good
beginning, although he was a bit ashamed of having made so direct an
appeal at the end to emotion instead of to reason. At the same time he
knew that it had been necessary. “’Rousements” were absolutely essential
to awaken the response needed to get the co-operative societies under
way. Without them his humble audience might not have been aroused to the
point of action that was so necessary.</p>
<p>Following Kenneth, Mr. Wilson made a stirring appeal to the crowd to
come forward and give their names if they wanted to join the newly
formed society. Those who had the money were urged to join at once. At
first, only a few came forward. Then they came in numbers until around
the table at which sat Secretary Tracy there was an excited, chattering,
milling throng.</p>
<p>After the meeting Mr. Phillips accepted Mr. Wilson’s invitation to
ride home in his car. Kenneth did not object—it enabled him to be alone
with Jane. They talked of the meeting as they walked to the car. Jane
gave Kenneth’s hand a faint squeeze. “Oh, Kenneth, you were splendid!”
she declared.</p>
<p>It was a perfect night—one created for making love. A soft light
filtered through the leaves of  the trees, casting a lace-like shadow on
the earth. The air was soft and languorous, as it can be only on a
spring evening in the South, as soft and caressing as the touch of a
baby’s hands. From near at hand came the mingled odour of honeysuckle
and cape jasmine and magnolia blossoms and roses. The world seemed at
peace. No sound disturbed the air save the chattering and singing of a
mockingbird, as lovely as the sob of velvety, full-throated violins, and
the voices, growing fainter and fainter, of the crowd leaving the now
deserted church. It would have taken a much stronger man than Kenneth to
resist the spell of so perfect an evening. He was not mawkishly
sentimental—rather he detested the moon-calfish type of man who rolled
his eyes and whispered empty, silly compliments in the ear of whatever
girl he met. On the other hand, he was amazingly ignorant of women. As a
youngster he had been exceedingly chary of the little girls of the
neighbourhood, preferring to spend his time playing baseball or shooting
marbles. This shyness had never entirely left him. From his youth on he
had had but one strong passion in his life that passion had possessed
his every thought and in it was centred his every ambition—his desire
and determination to become a great surgeon. His one serious venture
into the realm of love-making had been the affair with the girl in New
York, but that had not taken a strong enough hold upon him to leave much
of a mark. So rapidly had it begun and ended that he had had in it
little experience in the great American sport of  “petting.” It was thus easy for him to fall
head over heels in love with Jane, for she was, in fact, the first girl
in his life outside of his sister who had come into his life in more
than a casual way.</p>
<p>Jane, on the other hand, had, innocently enough, flirted as every
pretty girl (and many who are not pretty) will do. She appreciated
Kenneth’s fine qualities: he was capable, industrious, and handsome in a
way. He annoyed her at times by his almost bovine stupidity in
expressing his love. She naturally liked the idea of having the love of
a man who is naïve, who has not run the whole gamut of emotions in
affairs with other girls; yet, also naturally enough, she did expect him
to have at least some <i>savoir faire</i>, to be able to win her with
some degree of the finesse that every girl wants and expects. She
resented his business-like matter-of-factness in seeking her—as coldly
calculating, it seemed to her, as though he were operating on one of his
patients. In this she was doing him an injustice. Underneath his surface
placidity Kenneth’s love had become a raging flame—he cursed the shell
of professional dignity which had crossed over and become a part of
himself.</p>
<p>Thus they walked through the soft spring air, she wishing he would do
that which he in his ignorance felt would be the unwisest thing he could
attempt. Thus is life made up of paradoxical situations where a word, a
look, an otherwise insignificant gesture, would clear away at one fell
swoop mountainous clouds of doubt and misunderstanding.</p>
<p> Jane stood, one foot
on the ground, the other on the step, her hand resting on the opened
door of the car. A faintly provocative smile flitted over her face.
Kenneth longed to seize this elusive, seductive girl in his arms, press
her close to him, and tell her of his love. She wanted him to. Instead
he steeled himself against yielding to the impulse that almost overcame
him, and helped her with complete decorum into the car. …</p>
<p>They did not say much on the way home. Jane bade him good night, he
thought somewhat coldly—as though she were vexed. He told her he was
leaving the next morning for Atlanta to operate on Mrs. Tucker. She made
no comment. He wondered as he drove home what he had done to offend her.
…</p>
<p>As he neared the house, he suddenly remembered that he had promised
to look in on old Mrs. Amos, whose “rheumatics” had been giving her
considerable pain. It was charity work, as she would never be able to
pay him. She had sent for him several times during the day, but he had
been kept so busy he had had no time to go. He was annoyed at himself
for promising to call to see the quarrelsome old woman who was far more
dictatorial and exacting than most of the patients who paid him
promptly. With a muttered imprecation at being bothered with her just
after his annoying experience with Jane and her inexplicable behaviour,
he drove through the darkened streets to Mrs. Amos’ home. He found her
sitting in a creaky rocking-chair. She began immediately to pour
maledictions on his head for neglecting her all day. He answered her shortly,
gave her her medicine, and left.</p>
<p>Carefully guiding the car through the gullies and holes in the
unpaved street, he set out for home. Nearing the corner of Harris and
State Streets, he heard a sound as of several automobiles. He looked
down Harris Street just in time to see three closed cars stop suddenly
at the corner. From one of them two white-robed figures descended,
lifting a large, black bundle that seemed exceedingly heavy. This done,
the figures jumped hurriedly into the car, and it with the other two
speeded away in the direction from which they had come.</p>
<p>Kenneth, his curiosity aroused, turned his car around and drove to
the spot to see what was going on. As he slowed his car at the corner, a
muffled groan came from the object lying there in the street. Hastily
getting down, he turned it over and in the half-light found it to be the
body of a human being. His hands felt sticky. Holding them close to his
face, he found them smeared with tar.</p>
<p>He got from his car a small flashlight. Going back to the inert mass,
he turned the ray of light on the body and found it to be that of a
naked woman, covered with tar yet warm to the touch. Between the dabs of
the sticky mess on the woman’s back were long welts, some of them
bleeding, as though a heavy-thonged whip had been applied with great
force. The hair was dishevelled and in its strands were bits of the
melted tar. Kenneth experienced a feeling of nausea at the revolting
sight. The woman lay on her  face. From her mouth and nose there ran a
stream of blood which already was forming a little pool beneath her face
that became bloody mud as it mixed with the dust in the road. Seizing
her by her left shoulder, Kenneth half raised the body and turned his
flashlight on the woman’s face. It was Nancy Ware, the wife of the Negro
killed by George Parker. Half carrying, half dragging the limp form,
Kenneth managed in some fashion to get Nancy to her own home a few doors
away. The door stood open as though Nancy had left it for a minute to
call on one of her neighbours. On the table in the front room, there
stood a lamp yet burning, the chimney blackened with the soot caused by
the wind blowing upon it. Beside the lamp lay a garment on which Nancy
had been sewing.</p>
<p>Kenneth placed her on the bed and hurried next door to summon help.
His efforts were unsuccessful. He pounded on the door with both fists,
calling out in his excitement to the occupants to open up. After what
seemed an infinite delay, a window to the left of the door cautiously
opened and an inquiring voice wanted to know what was the matter. Seeing
who it was, the owner of the voice disappeared and a minute later opened
the door. Kenneth hastily told what had happened, brushing aside a
muttered excuse that the delay in answering was due to the fact that “I
didn’ know but whut you might ‘a’ been the p’lice.”</p>
<p>On going back to Nancy’s cottage, Kenneth gave her a restorative and
endeavoured to relieve her suffering. She began to revive after a few
minutes. In the meantime the neighbours called by Kenneth arrived, and
they removed as much as they could of the tar from Nancy’s body. Kenneth
then examined her back, finding it covered with long and ugly gashes
that bled profusedly. He dressed them and Nancy was arranged as
comfortably as possible. He found himself so tired after the hard work
and excitement of the day and evening that he was almost ready to drop
in his tracks. At the same time he had an uncontrollable desire to find
out just what had happened to Nancy Ware. He was almost certain the Ku
Klux Klan had done it, but he wanted to hear the story from Nancy’s own
lips. The neighbours had gone, with the exception of an evil-looking,
elderly woman who had volunteered to remain with Nancy until
morning.</p>
<p>After the application of restoratives regularly for an hour, she
began to show signs of returning consciousness. Kenneth watched her
eagerly. Five minutes later her eyelids fluttered. She gave a low
moan—almost a whimper. Suddenly she cried out in the terror of delirium:
“Doan let ‘em whip me no mo’! Doan let ’em whip me no mo?!” and writhed
in her agony. She struggled to arise but Kenneth, sitting by the side of
the bed, managed with the aid of the other woman to restrain Nancy and
calm her. Afterwards she became more rational. Her eyes opened. In them
was a gleam of recognition of Kenneth and he knew she was regaining
consciousness.</p>
<p> Another wait. Then,
at Kenneth’s questioning, she began to tell what had happened. For weeks
he had thought but little of her and the tragedy that had taken place in
this same house, other events having crowded it out of his mind.</p>
<p>“Doc, you won’t let ’em get me again, will you?” she pleaded with a
whimper like a child’s. Kenneth assured her he wouldn’t.</p>
<p>“Doc, I ain’t done nuthin’ t’ them Kluxers. Hones’ t’ Gawd, I ain’t.”
Kenneth told her soothingly that he knew she hadn’t.</p>
<p>“I was jes’ sittin’ here tendin’ to my own business when dey come a
rap on de do’. W’en I open de do’, dere wuz two o; dem Kluxers standin’
dere—befo’ I could holler dey grab me and put a rag in my mouf.” A
shudder passed through her body as the terror came back to her at the
memory of what she had been through.</p>
<p>“Dey put me in a automobile and ca’ied me way out yonder in de woods
by de fact’ry. Dey pull all my clo’es off me and den dey whip me till I
couldn’ stan’ up no mo’. Den dey tell me I been talkin’ too much. Doc, I
ain’t said a word t’ nobdy ‘cept dat dey oughter do somethin’t that man
George Parker for killin’ my man Bud. … Den dey po’ed tar all over me
and kick me and spit on me some mo’. … Said I oughter had mo’ sense dan
t’ talk ’bout no white gemmen. Oh—oh—oh—ain’t dey nothin’ to he’p us po’
cullud fo’ks—ain’t dey nobody—ain’t dey nobody?”</p>
<p>It was just as Kenneth had suspected. Good God,  and these were the self-elected defenders
of morals in the South! What if Nancy wasn’t all that she should have
been?—whose was the greater fault—hers or George Parker’s? He could see
him now in the bank—smug, a hypocritical smile on his face, talking
about what the white people have got to do to stop these troublesome
“niggers” from getting too cheeky—about protecting “pure” Southern
womanhood from attacks by “black, burly brutes.” And the Klan with all
its boasted and advertised chivalry—twenty or thirty strong men to beat
up and maltreat one lone woman, because she “talked too much” about the
brutal, cold-blooded murder of her husband! Kenneth’s optimism over the
organization of the cooperative societies began to cool—in its stead
there came a blind, unreasoning hatred and furious rage against the men
who had done this deed to Nancy Ware. God, but he would have given
anything he owned to get them all together and kill them one by
one—slowly, with all the tortures he could devise! The damned, cowardly
devils! The filthy, smug-faced hypocrites!</p>
<p>Nancy was resting easily Kenneth, shaken by the fury of his anger,
more devastating because he knew that he could do nothing but hurl
silent imprecations on the heads of those who had done this
deed—impotent because his skin was black and he lived in the South—went
home to roll and toss during the few hours of the night which remained
before he took the train to Atlanta.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XIV
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">I</span><span class="smallcaps">t</span>
seemed to Kenneth he had just fallen into a troubled slumber when he was
aroused by the tinkling of the telephone bell at the side of his bed. It
was Hiram Tucker.</p>
<p>“Doc, I reck’n you won’t have to go t’ Atlanty today, after all. My
wife, she tol’ me to tell you she’s changed her min’ ‘bout that
op’ration. … What’s dat? … Naw, suh, she’s kinder skeered she won’ wake
up from dat chlo’form. … Yas, suh, yas, suh, I knows ‘rangements been
made but, Doc, you ain’t married, so you don’t know nuthin’ ‘tall ’bout
wimmenfolks. … Some day you’ll learn dat when dey says dey ain’t gwine
do somethin’ dey’s done sot dere minds on not doing, dey ain’t gwine t’
do it. … Hello. … Hello. … Hello!”</p>
<p>But Kenneth had hung up. He telephoned the local telegraph office to
send a wire to the hospital in Atlanta to cancel the arrangements he had
made for the operation on the following day, and tumbled back in bed to
sleep like a log until late in the morning. He was awakened by Bob, who
informed him that the reception room was half filled with patients who
were no longer patient at being kept waiting so long. He arose
reluctantly, his eyes still filled with sleep. Bob leaned against the
wall, hands in pockets, and  looked at his brother with a smile of
amusement. Kenneth, not thoroughly awakened as yet, paid no attention to
him for a time, but at last noticed Bob’s smile.</p>
<p>“Why this early morning humour? I’ve seen many ’possums with a more
engaging smile then the one that distorts your face now!” he
half-grumblingly, half-cheerfully observed.</p>
<p>Bob but grinned the more at Kenneth’s remark.</p>
<p>“I was just thinking that if Jane could only get one glimpse of you
in the morning before breakfast, your chances would be mighty slim with
her.”</p>
<p>“Jane? What have my looks to do with her?” Kenneth retorted with some
heat, in a vain attempt to spar for time.</p>
<p>Bob addressed the world in general, calling on it for some aid in
understanding this brother of his.</p>
<p>“Jane?” he mimicked Kenneth’s tone of surprise. “You talk like a
ten-year-old boy with his first love affair. Isn’t he the innocent one,
though? Why, you poor maligned creature, everybody in Central City who
isn’t blind knows that you are head over heels in love with Jane
Phillips. And,” he added as an afterthought, “those who are blind have
been told it. But to return to my original observation, if there was
some means by which, with all propriety, all the girls in the world who
are in love could see, and be seen by, the poor boobs with whom they are
so infatuated, marriage-licence bureaus would be closed that day, never
to open again.” This last with an omniscient air of worldly wisdom that
caused  Kenneth to burst
into a roar of laughter, while Bob watched him, somewhat
discomfited.</p>
<p>“What’re you laughing at?” he demanded in an aggrieved tone. Kenneth
laughed all the harder. “Why, you poor little innocent, you haven’t
gotten rid of your pin feathers, and yet you are talking as though you
were a philosopher like Schopenhauer. You’d better wait until you finish
school and see something of the world. Then you can talk a little—though
only a little as you did just now. By the way, it’s about time for you
to be planning for school this fall. Still thinking about going back to
Atlanta?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know what I want to do,” was Bob’s troubled rejoinder. “I’ve
seen too much of what’s going on around this town since papa died to be
satisfied with school again. I’ve probably seen more of the real
sordidness and meanness and deviltry of this place since I’ve been
settling up papa’s affairs than you’ll see in five years. At any rate, I
hope you don’t,” he finished somewhat doubtfully.</p>
<p>“Bob”—Kenneth walked over and put his arm around his brother’s
shoulders—the trouble with you is that you’re too darned sensitive. I
know things aren’t all they ought to be around here, but we’ve got to
buckle down and make them that way. And perhaps I’ve seen more of this
deviltry than you think.”</p>
<p>He told Bob of what had happened to Nancy Ware the night before. A
long whistle of surprise escaped from Bob’s lips.</p>
<p> “And this happened
right here in the coloured section?” he asked in surprise. Kenneth
nodded in assent.</p>
<p>“I felt they were planning some mischief but I didn’t think they
would have the nerve to come right here in ‘Darktown’ and do it. I
wonder,” he said musingly, “if that dirty little Jim Archer who said
those filthy things to Minnie Baxter that day is a member of the Klan. I
passed him on Lee Street this morning and he grinned at me like a cat
that has just eaten a fat mouse.”</p>
<p>“He may be,” Kenneth replied. “Nancy Ware told me last night she
recognized the voices of Sheriff Parker and Henry Lane and George Parker
and two or three other prominent white people here.”</p>
<p>“That settles it,” Bob answered determinedly. “When you first came
back here I thought you were foolish to do so after having been in
France. I said I was going to get out of this country as soon as I could
and live in France or Brazil or any old place where a man isn’t judged
by the colour of his skin. But I’ve decided that I’d be a coward if I
did run away like that. Ken,” he said in voice that showed he had passed
in spite of his years from childhood into the more serious things of
manhood, “I’m going to Harvard this fall. I’m going to take whatever
course I need to get into the law school. I’m going to make myself the
best lawyer they can turn out. And then I’m coming back here to the
South like you did and give my time to fighting for my people!”</p>
<p>Bob’s eyes flashed. In them was a light of  high resolve such a look as might have
shone in the eyes of Garibaldi or of Joan of Arc.</p>
<p>Kenneth said nothing, but he gripped Bob’s hand in his and there
passed between the two brothers a look of mutual understanding and
sympathy that was more potent and meaningful than words.</p>
<p>Kenneth went down to attend to his patients and nothing more was said
of the incident between them. Bob took on a new interest in life. His
moodiness, his brooding over the constant irritations and insults he had
to suffer in his dealings as a coloured man with the whites of the town,
his resentment at the attitude of condescension on the part of the poor
and ignorant whites who had neither his intelligence, his education, nor
his wealth—all these disappeared in his eager preparations for the new
life he had mapped out for himself. He already saw himself a powerful
champion of his race and he gloried in that vision with all of the
impetuosity and idealistic fervour of youth.</p>
<p>As for Kenneth, he divided his time between his practice, Jane, and
the formation of more branches of the N.N.F.C.P.L.</p>
<p>Kenneth knew there was nothing to be done towards the punishment of
the men who had so brutally beaten Nancy Ware. He knew that it would
even be unwise for him to talk too much about it. If Sheriff Parker was
himself a member of the Klan, reporting the outrage to him would be in
effect a serving of notice that he was meddling in the affairs of the
Klan which might bring disastrous results at a  time when Kenneth was most anxious to avoid
such a complication, certainly until the co-operative societies were
well under way and actively functioning. Much as he chafed under the
restraint and at his own impotence in the situation, Kenneth knew that
his interference would be a useless and foolhardy butting of his head
against a stone wall.</p>
<p>It occurred to him to tell what had happened to Judge. Stevenson. He
could be trusted and was as much opposed to the outlawry of the Klan as
Kenneth himself. The judge listened gravely to the end without comment
other than a question here and there. “That looks worse than I thought,”
he said half to himself. “A few mo’ cracks like that and there’ll be
hell to pay ‘round here. But ’twon’t do no good for you t’ meddle in
it,” he observed in answer to Kenneth’s question as to what he could do.
“If Nancy’s right about Bob Parker being in it, your sayin’ anything
will only set them on you. You’d better go ahead and get your societies
on their feet and then you’ll have somethin’ behin’ you. Then you won’t
be playin’ a lone hand.”</p>
<p>As for the coloured people, there were several days of excited gossip
over what had happened to Nancy Ware. There was not much to go on, as
she had been so frightened by her terrible experience that she refused
for once to talk. The only tangible effect was that mysterious parcels
marked with the names of household implements began to arrive at the
homes of the coloured people, but which contained fire-arms and
ammunition. There was also a noticeable tightening of the lips and the
development of a less cordial relationship between white and black.
Negroes, feeling that there was no help they could expect from the law,
felt that their backs were being slowly pressed against the wall. Within
a few hours the old <i>esprit cordial</i> between white and black had
been wiped out. Negroes who had been happy-go-lucky, care-free, and
kindly in manner began to talk among themselves of “dying fighting” if
forced to the limit.</p>
<p>July came with all its heat. August passed with yet more heat. With
the coming of September there had been formed in Smith County alone
seven branch societies of the Co-operative and Protective League with a
membership of more than twelve hundred. Kenneth worked as one inspired,
one who knew neither heat nor cold, fatigue nor hunger. During the day
he was busy with his practice, but it mattered not how busy he had been,
he was always ready and willing to drive five, ten, fifteen miles at
night to aid in establishing new branches or directing and guiding and
advising those already established.</p>
<p>The Ashland Branch, through the hard work of Hiram Tucker and Tom
Tracy, had enrolled three hundred and fifteen members. In its treasury
it had $657.85, to which it was constantly adding as new members were
enrolled. At a meeting held during the latter part of August the members
decided that they would forgo the purchasing of their supplies in bulk
that year but would use the money raised towards prosecuting one of the
cases of dishonest 
settlements when the time came for such settlements, usually in December
or January. This step was decided upon after due and lengthy
deliberation, as it was felt that if they could end the cheating of the
farmers through court action, then these same farmers would have more
money through the settlement of their accounts for the present season
and could then begin the co-operative buying and distribution the
following year.</p>
<p>News of the new society that was going to end the unsatisfactory
relations share-croppers had with their landlords spread rapidly
throughout the surrounding counties. Letters, crudely and cumbersomely
worded and with atrocious spelling, came to Kenneth and often
individuals came in person to ask that he come to their counties to
organize societies there. Kenneth was elated at this sign of interest.
He had expected a great deal of opposition from the coloured farmers.
Bickering and carping criticism there was aplenty, but most of them
regarded him as a new Moses to lead them into the promised land of
economic independence. Minor disputes over authority in the local
societies there were in abundance. But none of them was hard to settle,
for the members themselves were too eager to get out of bondage to
tolerate much petty politics and selfishness on the part of their
officers.</p>
<p>As a loyal ally Kenneth learned to rely on Jane more and more. Often
she went with him to attend meetings and to talk to groups not yet
organized. While Kenneth talked to the men, Jane circulated  among the women, who were
subtly flattered that one so daintily clad and well educated should
spend so much of her time and energy talking to lowly ones like
themselves.</p>
<p>Her mother’s health had not been of the best during the summer. That
had been throughout the summer her only worry. In August her mother had
suffered an attack of paralysis, her second one. Jane decided to remain
at home instead of going to Oberlin to resume her music. Dr. Bennett had
been dismissed and Kenneth was now treating Mrs. Phillips. During her
more serious illness in August, Jane often sat on one side of her
mother’s bed until late in the night while Kenneth sat on the other,
ministering to the aged woman’s wants. There came a new and stronger
feeling of companionship between the two. Often Kenneth would look up
suddenly and catch in Jane’s eyes a new tenderness. Without knowing what
it meant, he felt a subtly conveyed encouragement in them.</p>
<p>He had, however, spoken no word of love to her, preferring to bide
his time until a propitious occasion arose. He had told her that he
loved her—had he not done so, she would have known—he was content to
wait until she could decide what she wanted to do. At times the task was
hard not to tell her again and again of his love. Often as she sat by
his side and talked of inconsequential things, he would again be seized
by that consuming impulse to sweep away all her objections and demolish
by the very violence of his love the obstacles that held him back from
possessing her. He found
himself more and more filled with a wonderment that bordered on dismay
as he tried to suppress this devastating longing with less success every
time this feeling came over him. He tried staying away from Jane. At
first he had seen her but once a week and that on Sunday evenings. Then
he began dropping by to see her on Wednesdays. Of late his visits had
numbered three and four a week. On those nights when he was away, he was
restless and irritable. This became so noticeable that Mamie threatened
jokingly one night to go over and beg Jane to marry Kenneth or throw him
down hard or anything that would make him less like a bear around the
house. She and Jane had become fast friends—which pleased Kenneth not a
little, as it meant that Jane would be more frequently in the house than
otherwise would have been the case.</p>
<p>As for Jane, in spite of herself, she found herself more and more
interested in Kenneth and the things he was doing. She found herself
eagerly looking forward to the evenings when he called. She wondered if
she were entirely honest in seeing so much of him.</p>
<p>Why didn’t Kenneth say something now? She felt rather annoyed at him
for being so considerate. With a woman’s prerogative of inconsistency,
she resented his obeying so implicitly her demand that he wait until she
had made up her mind. Men were so silly—you told them to do a thing and
they went like fools and did it. Why didn’t he talk about something else
besides his old co-operative societies  and the Ku Klux Klan and his old hospital
and what that old Judge Stevenson had said to him that day? Life is such
a funny thing.</p>
<p>But Kenneth went along his way, not even suspecting what was going on
in Jane’s mind. He was like the majority of men—wise in their own minds
but amazingly naïve and ignorant when they left the beaten paths of
everyday affairs.</p>
<p>The end of the first week in September came. Bob had completed all
arrangements to leave the following week for Cambridge, there to take
his entrance examinations, after studying for them all summer. Kenneth
had written to an old friend there who had made the necessary
negotiations. Bob was an entirely new individual from the one he had
been when Kenneth had returned to Central City. His air of moody
resentment had been replaced by an eager earnestness to begin the course
he had planned for himself. The bond had grown closer between him and
Kenneth, and many hours they spent together discussing and planning for
the years to come. Often the two brothers and Mamie, sometimes Mrs.
Harper also, sat until far in the night talking of the future. If Mamie
felt saddened by the broader and more active life her brothers were
planning which she, as a woman, was denied, it never showed on her face
or in her voice. She might have been married long before in fact, there
had been three or four men who wanted to marry her. None of them would
she have. Decent enough men they were. But she was unwilling to settle
down to the humdrum life of  marriage with a man so far beneath her in
intelligence, in ideals, in education. Being a normal, warmhearted human
being, naturally she often pictured to herself what marriage in Central
City would be like. But, keenly sensitive and ambitious, she shrank from
marrying the type of men available, farmers, small merchants, and the
like—she shuddered when she visualized herself bearing children to such
a man to be brought up in a place like Central City. She yearned for
love and as steadfastly put it from her. There are thousands of
tragedies—for tragedy it is—like Mamie’s in the South, and the world
knows it not. When Kenneth or Bob teased her about marrying, she
answered him with a brave and all-concealing smile-all-concealing, that
is, to masculine eyes. Only her mother and Jane knew her secret, and
their lips were sealed in the bond which women seldom, if ever, break.
…</p>
<p>That night Jane looked better than Kenneth had ever seen her look
before. They seldom went out except for a short ride in his car. For
there was no place to which they could go. Central City boasted one
place of public amusement—the Idle Hour Moving Picture Palace. And to
that no Negro could go. Once they had admitted Negroes to the gallery.
None of the better element ever went, as they had to go through a dark
and foul-smelling alleyway to reach the entrance they had to use. The
type of Negroes whose pride permitted them to go were so boisterous and
laughed so loud that even they were soon barred.</p>
<p> As usual they sat on
the vine-covered porch where a breath of cool air was more likely to be
had than in the parlour. That day he had had one of his more frequently
recurring spells when he felt that he could not keep his promise a day
longer to wait until Jane had made up her mind. At first he had thought
of telephoning her and saying that he was ill or busy—any old excuse to
stay away. But he wanted to see her too much for that patent evasion. He
would go over to see her but would talk of nothing but business or
co-operative societies. That’s it, he would keep in “safe” territory.
But Jane had never looked more lovely than on that particular night.
Kenneth’s heart jumped as he greeted her after she had kept him waiting
just the right length of time. He likened her instinctively to a
flame-coloured flower of rare beauty. All of the suppressed passion
surged upward in him. He felt himself slipping. He turned away to gain
control of himself. Had he not done so, he would have seen the swift
look of disappointment on her face at his restraint.</p>
<p>Keeping his eyes resolutely in front of him, he talked wearily and
wearisomely of the meeting he had attended the night before, of how
troublesome and irritating Mrs. Amos had been that day with her
rheumatism, of his having at last persuaded Mrs. Hiram Tucker to go to
Atlanta to have the operation she had so many times postponed. Jane
answered him abstractedly and in monosyllables. At last she moved,
almost with obvious meaning, to the canvas porch swing and there rested
against the pillows piled  in one corner. And yet Kenneth talked
drearily on and on and on. He spoke at length of a conversation he had
had with Bob that morning—of how glad he was that Bob was going away to
school. Jane swung gently back and forth—and said nothing. Mr. Phillips
came out on the porch and offered Kenneth a cigar, which he accepted and
lighted. Mr. Phillips sat down and talked garrulously while the two men
smoked. Jane felt that she could hardly keep from screaming. After what
seemed an hour, Mr. Phillips, his topics of conversation exhausted, and
at a sign from Jane that was not to be disregarded, rose heavily and
lumbered into the house again.</p>
<p>Kenneth threw away the stump of his cigar. It had suddenly occurred
to him that Jane hadn’t said very much for the past hour. He rose to
go.</p>
<p>Jane sat silent as though unmindful of his having risen. He looked
closely at her. Tears of he knew not what stood in her eyes. He dropped
to the seat beside her, wondering what he had done to hurt her so.
“Jane, what’s the matter?” he asked in a troubled voice. “What have I
done?” She looked at him. … He didn’t know what happened next. Suddenly
he found her in his arms. He strained her to him with all the passion he
had been restraining for the months that seemed like years. He kissed
her hair. He mumbled incoherently, yet with perfect understanding, to
Jane, tender endearments. At length she raised her face from where it
had been buried on his chest, gazed straight into his eyes.  Their lips met in a long,
clinging, rapturous kiss. …</p>
<p>“How long have you known?” he asked her. Men are such idiots—they are
never satisfied to take what comes to them—they must ask silly and
nonsensical questions.</p>
<p>She told him. Of her long struggle, of her decision, of her annoyance
at his blindness. They talked eagerly until long past the hour of ten.
He heard Mr. Phillips moving chairs and dropping his shoes—obvious hints
that the time to go had long since passed. They paid no attention to
these danger signals but laughed softly to themselves.</p>
<p>Everything must end eventually. Kenneth walked homewards through the
soft light of the September moon. Amusedly, the phrase “walking on air”
occurred to him. He laughed aloud. “Walking on air” was as the rheumatic
stumping along of old Mrs. Amos compared to the way he felt. …</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XV
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">I</span><span class="smallcaps">t</span>
was the next night. In the gully on the road leading from that one out
of Central City which went northward, there was being held a hastily
called meeting of Central City Klan, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, Realm
of Georgia. Before, there had been three hundred robed figures.
To-night, three months later, the popularity of organized intolerance
was attested to by the presence of fully five hundred. What had happened
to Nancy Ware had acted as a powerful incentive to the recruiting of new
converts. It was mighty fine to have a strong and powerful organization
to shut mouths of those who talked too much about the night-time deeds
of loyal Klansmen. And, by gum, if you’re doing anything you don’t want
known or stopped, you’d better be on the inside.</p>
<p>A figure whose arms waved excitedly as he talked was haranguing the
crowd, which paid close attention to him. Had Tom Tracy been there, he
would certainly have recognized the voice of the speaker. Ed Stewart’s
wife, had she been there, would also have recognized it and dragged the
speaker home by force had he resisted.</p>
<p>“White civilization in the South is tottering on its  throne!” he shouted. “We who
hold in our hands the future of civilization have been asleep! While we
have gone about our ways, the damn niggers are plottin’ to kill us all
in our beds! Right now they’re bringing into our fair city great passels
of guns and ammunition marked ‘sewin’ m’chines’ and ‘ploughs’! They’re
meetin’ ev’ry night in these nigger churches all over the county and
they’re plottin’ an’ plannin’ to kill ev’ry white man, woman an’ chile
in this county and take the lan’ for themselves! They’re led by a damn
nigger doctor right here in Central City named Harper! I know it’s so,
‘cause another nigger doctor named Williams tol’ me yestiddy mornin’ all
about it and said that this nigger Harper was leadin’ this vile plot!
He’s been goin’ all over the county stirrin’ up the damn niggers and
incitin’ them to murder all of us! What’re you men goin’ to do?” he
challenged in a voice that shrilled in pretended rage and terror.</p>
<p>A deep-throated roar answered him. Cries of “Kill the bastards!”
“Lynch ’em!” “Kill every black bastard befo’ mornin!” It was the
age-long voice of the mob bent on murder—the pack in full cry. But it
was more than the voice of the mob of the Roman Colosseum, for that
ancient cry was one of pleasure at the death of a single Christian. This
was the shout of those intent on a wild, murderous rampage that spared
neither man, woman, nor child.</p>
<p>“Klansmen!”</p>
<p>A voice like that of a bull roared until the tumult had subsided. It
was the Exalted Cyclops of the  Central City Klan. He stood in silence
until the group of hooded figures was still.</p>
<p>“The noble order of the Ku Klux Klan don’t handle situations such as
this like a mob!” The figures stood expectantly, eagerly waiting to hear
what would come next.</p>
<p>“We have listened to the story told by our fellow Klansmen. Hol’
yo’se’ves ready for the call of the Invisible Empire at any minute. We
have planned the way to en’ this dastardly plot and to punish those
responsible with death!”</p>
<p>“That’s right! Kill ‘em! Lynch ’em! Burn th’ bastards!” shouted the
crowd.</p>
<p>“That’ll be done till ev’ry one is killed!” promised the Exalted
Cyclops. “But it can’t be done so’s it can be laid to our noble order!
Already our enemies are charging us with crimes! The Fed’ral Gov’nment
will be down on our heads!”</p>
<p>There were cries of “Damn the Gov’nment!” from some of the more
hot-headed. But calmer judgment prevailed. Something was to be done, but
what that ominous “something” might be, was not revealed. Each man was
to be ready for instantaneous duty upon call of the Klan. Immediate
action was not wise, for the Klan investigators had not completed their
work. Action must wait until that had been done, for it was essential
that not one of the plotters should escape.</p>
<p>This last point was emphasized. At last the crowd became more calm
with the determination to postpone its vengeance until it was certain of
being complete.  It then
dispersed its several ways, dissolving into separate groups that talked
excitedly of the astounding and terrifying news, the need of prompt
action, the great luck the white folks had had in discovering the plot
so soon, violent denunciation of the Negroes in the plot.</p>
<p>In one of the groups the conversation was different. One of the group
was the Exalted Cyclops, in private life Sheriff Bob Parker; another was
the Kligrapp, otherwise Henry Lane, Commissioner of Health; the third
was the speaker who had revealed the plot, Ed Stewart, Tom Tracy’s
landlord.</p>
<p>Sheriff Parker chuckled softly. “Well, Ed, looks like somethin’ is
about to break loose, eh?” he observed.</p>
<p>“Yep, I reck’n you’re right. Them damn niggers’ve got a hell of a
nerve! Formin’ sassieties to ‘stop robbin’ share-croppers’! When we get
through with ’em, they’ll be formin’ coal-shov’lin’ sassieties in hell!”
The other two joined in the laugh at his grim joke. “We’ll put in th’
papers they was formin’ to kill white folks and they’ll never know but
what that ain’t true.”</p>
<p>Parker laughed again. Waving his hand at the departing Klansmen,
there came to his face a cynical sneer. “An’ them damn fools really
think they’re sho’ly goin’ to be murdered by the damn niggers!”</p>
<div class="break">
</div>
<p>In another section of Central City there was being enacted at the
same time another scene of poignant drama that threatened to translate
itself into tragedy. 
The place was a darkened bedroom in the home of Roy Ewing on Georgia
Avenue, and the actors in it were four in number. Roy Ewing, owner and
manager of the Ewing General Merchandise Store, whom Kenneth had seen
but little since Ewing had discontinued his nocturnal visits to
Kenneth’s office, was one of the actors. His wife, whose face still bore
evidences of a youthful beauty that was fast fading, was a second. A
third was old Dr. Bennett, who sat by the bed, his hair dishevelled, his
face lined with perplexity and anxiety, as he apprehensively watched the
fourth actor in the drama, a girl of nineteen who was restlessly tossing
in pain on the bed. Row Ewing stood at the foot of the bed. His wife sat
on the other side uttering little snatches of phrases of soothing
sympathy which her daughter did not hear.</p>
<p>Dr. Bennett was plainly worried and at a loss what to do to relieve
the torture Ewing’s daughter was so clearly experiencing. He turned to
Ewing. “Roy, to tell you the truth, it don’t seem like I can find out
what’s the matter with Mary. When she had that first attack, I thought
she had appendicitis, but she ain’t got no fever to speak of, so it
can’t be her appendix that’s botherin’ her. Looks like t’ me she’s got
some sort of bleedin’ inside, but I can’t tell.”</p>
<p>Ewing and his wife looked anxiously first at their daughter, then
interrogatively and pleadingly at the old physician as he watched the
sufferer in her contortions of pain and agony. Mary, married
two months and her husband working in Atlanta, had lived with her
parents after a short honeymoon. She had her mother’s beauty—that is,
the delicate, patrician, statuesque charm that had been her mother’s
when Roy Ewing had courted and won her two decades ago in Charleston,
South Carolina. It was not the harsh-lined, blonde beauty of Georgia but
the fragile old-world, French loveliness of that spot in South Carolina
where French tradition and customs and features had not yet been
barbarized by the infusion of that Anglo-Saxon blood which is the boast
of the South. She lay there, a pitiful sight. Her face was pale, covered
with cold, clammy perspiration; all blood had fled from it. She breathed
with great difficulty in short and laboured respiratory efforts. Her
pulse was failing, very rapid and thready; at times it was barely
perceptible. She had been seized with the attack around seven o’clock,
when she began vomiting. Now she appeared to be so weakened with the
pain she had endured that a state of coma was obviously fast
approaching. At least it seemed so. Dr. Bennett tried to revive her, but
with little success. The absence of fever puzzled him. He feared an
internal hæmorrhage—all signs pointed to such a condition—yet he did not
know. Roy Ewing and his wife were among his closest friends. He would
have tried an operation had they not been. That he feared to risk with
their daughter. Yet, what could he do? Mary was obviously so weak that
 he knew she could not
be moved to Atlanta, three hundred miles away. Nor would a physician be
able to get to Central City in time to operate.</p>
<p>“I’m puzzled, Roy, mighty puzzled,” he said, turning to Ewing. “I
might as well tell you the truth. Looks like t’ me she c’n hardly last
till mornin’.” It was gall and wormwood for him to admit his impotency,
but he did it.</p>
<p>“Dr. Bennett, you’ve got to do somethin’! You’ve got to! You’ve got
to!”</p>
<p>It was Mrs. Ewing who cried out in her agony—the piteous cry of a
mother who sees her first-born dying before her eyes. Her face was as
blanched as Mary’s—every drop of blood seemed to have been drained from
it. She looked pleadingly at him, chill terror gripping her heart as she
realized from his words that her Mary, who had been so happy and well
that morning, was about to die.</p>
<p>“If you—all wasn’t such good friends of mine, I’d try it anyhow,”
Dr. Bennett answered her, his voice as agonized as hers. “But I’m
skeered to op’rate or do anythin’ that might hasten her on.”</p>
<p>Ewing walked over to the doctor, grasped the older man’s shoulders so
fiercely that he winced in pain.</p>
<p>“By God,” he shouted at Dr. Bennett, “you’ve got to operate! I can’t
see my little Mary die right here befo’ my eyes! Go ahead and do what
you think best. It’ll be better’n seein’ her die while we stand here
doin’ nothin’!”.</p>
<p>“Roy,” Dr. Bennett groaned, “you know there ain’t anythin’ I wouldn’t
do for you—’cept this.” 
He waved his hand vaguely towards the bed. As he did so, he looked with
keen appraisement at Ewing in the dim light. He seemed to be debating in
his mind whether or not he dared take a very long chance. If the chance
would not be more disastrous. If Mary’s life might not be better lost
than that! Ewing almost stopped breathing as he saw the momentary
indecision in the physician’s face. Mrs. Ewing saw none of this by-play,
for she had sunk down on the bed, where her body was shaken with the
sobs she could not restrain.</p>
<p>“There’s jus’ one chance t’ save her,” Dr. Bennett hesitatingly
began. Ewing leaned forward in his eagerness.</p>
<p>“There’s jus’ this one hope,” Dr. Bennett repeated, “but I don’t know
if you’d be willin’ to take that chance.”</p>
<p>“I don’t give a damn what it is!” Ewing shouted in his anxiety. “I’ll
take it! What is it, Doc? I don’t care what it costs! What is it?” He
quivered as with a chill in his excitement—the excitement of the
drowning man who sees a possible rescuer as he is about to go down for
the third time. Mrs. Ewing had stopped crying—she seemed as though she
had forgotten to breathe. They both waited eagerly for the older man to
speak. At last he did. He paused after each word.</p>
<p>“Th’only—man—I know—near enough—to op’rate—in
time—is—a—nigger-doctor—here—named—Harper!”</p>
<p>“Oh, my God!” groaned Ewing as he sank to his  knees beside the bed and buried his face in
his hands. “A nigger—seein’ my Mary—operatin’ on her—Good God! I’d
rather see her dead than have a nigger put his hands on her! No! No!
No!” He fairly screamed the last in his fury.</p>
<p>“I didn’t think you’d do it,” said Dr. Bennett miserably. “I jus’
felt I oughter tell you. He’s jus’ out of school—studied in one of the
bes’ schools up No’th—and in France. He might save Mary—but I can’t
blame you none for not havin’ him.”</p>
<p>While he was speaking, Ewing jumped to his feet and paced up and down
the room like a caged and wounded tiger. On the one hand was the life of
his daughter—on the other his inherent, acquired, environmental
prejudice. None but those who know intimately the depth and passion of
that prejudice as it flourishes in the South can know what torture what
a hell—what agony Ewing was going through. Prejudice under almost any
circumstances is hard enough to bear—in Ewing’s case his very soul was
tormented at such an unheard-of thing as a Negro operating on his
daughter.</p>
<p>“Roy!”</p>
<p>He turned abruptly at the sound of his wife’s voice, having forgotten
for the time everything—wife, surroundings, all—as he struggled with the
problem he faced.</p>
<p>“Roy!” Her voice was weak because of the ordeal through which she was
passing. She ran to him, seizing his arm and looking up at him
pleadingly.</p>
<p> “Roy! I can’t see
our Mary die! I can’t let her die!”</p>
<p>“Would you have a nigger see her naked?” he demanded of her fiercely.
“Would you? Would you?”</p>
<p>Her head went back sharply at the roughness of his tone. In her eyes
flashed that brilliant, burning look of mother love that submits to no
dangers, no obstacles.</p>
<p>“I’d do anything to save her!” she cried.</p>
<p>“No, no, Mary,” Ewing pleaded, “we can’t do that! We can’t!”</p>
<p>She did not hear him. Brushing past him, she caught Dr. Bennett by
the arm as he rose to his feet. “Get that doctor here quick!” she
demanded of him. …</p>
<p>When Dr. Bennett telephoned him to come to Roy Ewing’s home as
quickly as he could, Kenneth was somewhat puzzled. He went at once,
deciding that one of the servants was sick. When told that it was Mary
Ewing he was to treat, he could not conceal his amazement. He followed
Roy Ewing and the doctor to her room, the while he was trying to make
himself realize that he, Kenneth Harper, a Negro doctor, had been called
to treat a white person—a white woman—in the South. Reaching the
bedside, though, he put aside his bewilderment and began at once the
diagnosis to discover what the trouble was. He listened without speaking
to Dr. Bennett as the old man told him the symptoms Mary had shown and
what  he thought was the
matter. Ewing was sent from the room. Kenneth rapidly examined the
patient—and decided that she was having severe internal hæmorrhages. It
looked like an acute and dangerous case.</p>
<p>Immediate operation seemed the only hope. And even that hope was a
slim one. He informed Dr. Bennett of his diagnosis.</p>
<p>Ewing was summoned. Briefly Kenneth told him his theory of the
trouble—that the only hope was immediate operation. Ewing faltered,
hesitated, seemed about to refuse to allow it. At that moment a loud
scream of pain was wrung from Mary’s lips. He winced as though he had
been struck. He shrugged his shoulders in assent to the operation. …</p>
<p>Kenneth telephoned Mrs. Johnson, the nurse who had helped him before,
to be ready to go with him for an operation in ten minutes. He drove
rapidly home, secured his instruments, ether, sterilizer, gown and other
equipment, bundled them into his car, called for Mrs. Johnson,
explaining briefly to her the nature of the case as he drove as rapidly
as he could to the Ewing home.</p>
<p>Mary was carried downstairs and placed on the dining-room table.
Dr. Bennett agreed to give the anæsthesic. Kenneth went rapidly, yet
surely, to work. In his element now, he forgot time, place, the unusual
circumstances, and everything else. Swiftly he began the delicate and
perilous task as soon as Dr. Bennett had sufficiently etherized the
patient. Yet, even in the stress of the moment, he could not  keep down the ironical
thoughts that crept to his brain in spite of all efforts to bar them.
The South’s a funny place, he mused. Must have been a mighty hard thing
for old Bennett to have to admit that he, a Negro, knew more about
operating in a case like this than he did himself. Roy Ewing must have
had a bad half-hour deciding whether or not he’d let a Negro do the
operation on his daughter. Hope nothing goes wrong—if it does, might as
well pick out some other town to go to. Oh, well, won’t let that worry
me. Have to make the best of it—save her if possible.</p>
<p>Weakened by the severe hæmorrhages she had been having, Mary was in a
condition of extreme shock. The least slip, Kenneth realized, and
nothing could save her. Her face wan and drawn, Mary’s life hung
precariously in the balance—the odds were all against her while the grim
spectre of death crept slowly but surely upon her.</p>
<p>Beads of perspiration stood upon Kenneth’s brow as he fought for her
life. Though he could not have done the operation himself, Dr. Bennett
sensed the gravity of the situation. The older man leaned forward in his
anxiety—hardly daring to breathe for fear of interrupting the deft, sure
touch of the operator. Ten—fifteen—twenty—thirty—forty—fifty minutes
crept by on lagging feet—to the two doctors and the nurse each minute
seemed an hour.</p>
<p>Despite all his efforts, Kenneth knew Mary was rapidly sinking. The
loss of blood and strength, the severity of the shock, the enervating
spasms of  pain she had
suffered, had sapped her strength until all resistive power was gone.
Kenneth knew that Dr. Bennett knew this too—even in the desperate
struggle he wondered what the other would say and do—if the girl died.
He tried to shake off the fear that seized him—fear of what would happen
if it became known among the whites that Mary Ewing had died while a
Negro was operating on her. No mortal could have done more. Even were
that known and admitted, it would not save him, Kenneth knew.</p>
<p>The tense situation became too much for him. When he should have been
steadiest, the double strain on his nerves caused his hand to slip.
Blood spurted forth. Kenneth feverishly caught the bleeding artery with
a hæmostatic and sought to repair the damage he had done.</p>
<p>“Tough luck,” muttered Dr. Bennett. Kenneth looked up at him. The
older man grunted and smiled encouragingly. A burden seemed lifted from
Kenneth’s shoulders. Mrs. Johnson wiped the perspiration that streamed
from Kenneth’s face. She seemed endowed with a sixth sense that told her
his needs almost before he was aware of them himself.</p>
<p>It was a strange sight. Anywhere in America. In Georgia it was
amazing beyond belief. A white woman patient. A white anæsthetizer. A
black nurse. A black surgeon. …</p>
<p>All things must come to an end. Kenneth rapidly sewed up the
incision. He bandaged the wound tightly. She yet breathed.</p>
<p>Kenneth opened the door and admitted Ewing, who  had paced the hall since the operation
began. Every minute of the hour he had been there, he had had to fight
hard to keep himself from bursting into the room and stopping the
operation. He had been restrained by the positiveness with which he had
been ejected from the room by Kenneth—there was something in the
physician’s air that had warned him without words that he must not
interfere. Something within him told him Kenneth was right—knew what he
was doing. The colour and race of the surgeon had been almost forgotten
in the strange circumstances. “Will she live?” he asked, his words
whispered in so hoarse a tone they could hardly be heard.</p>
<p>“I don’t know—it’ll be forty-eight hours before we can tell—if she
lives that long,” answered Kenneth. The strain had been greater than he
had known. Kenneth felt a strange weakening—lassitude gripped his
body—he felt a nausea that came with the reaction after the mental
ordeal. Ewing stood by the table on which lay his child. Tears which he
forgot to wipe away stood in his eyes as he watched her laboured
breathing. Dr. Bennett put his hand on Ewing’s shoulder.</p>
<p>“He did all he could!” he declared, nodding at Kenneth. There was
admiration in the old doctor’s voice.</p>
<p>Ewing rushed off to give the news to his wife. …</p>
<p>The three men carried the unconscious form to her room. With a short
“Good night” to Dr. Bennett, Kenneth left the house with Mrs. Johnson
and drove away. …</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XVI
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">T</span><span class="smallcaps">he</span> following day Kenneth was kept busy
arranging his affairs in order to leave the following morning for
Atlanta for the operation on Mrs. Tucker. It had been a most difficult
task for him to persuade her to have it done. He had been at last
successful when he made her realize that it would mean either the
operation or death. She dreaded the trip to Atlanta but Kenneth refused
to perform the operation except at a hospital and there was none nearer
than Atlanta at which a Negro could operate.</p>
<p>During the day he had been kept so busy that he had not had time to
go out of the coloured section except once, and that when in the late
afternoon he drove through Lee Street to see how Mary Ewing was faring.
He had been so busy with his own thoughts that he had paid little
attention to the whites who were standing around on the streets. He did
not see the threatening and hostile looks they gave nor did he notice
the excited whispering and muttering when he came into their sight.</p>
<p>Ed Stewart had partly told the truth at the meeting of the Klan when
he said that Dr. Williams had informed him of the organization Kenneth
and the others were forming. Kenneth had seen little of the  pompous and intensely jealous
physician since the time when he had forced Dr. Williams to assist him
in the appendicitis operation on Mrs. Emma Bradley. Kenneth had felt
nothing but an amused contempt for his fellow-practitioner, for he knew
that Dr. Williams covered his deficiencies in medical knowledge and
skill with the bombastic and self-important air he affected.</p>
<p>Dr. Williams, on the other hand, had never forgiven Kenneth for the
incident in which Kenneth had shown him up in a manner that injured the
former’s pride far more than Kenneth had suspected. Dr. Williams felt
that the younger man had deliberately and with malice aforethought
offered a gratuitous insult to him as dean of the coloured medical
profession of Central City, though that profession numbered but two
members. Kenneth’s success as a physician in Central City, having taken
as he had some of the best of Dr. Williams’ own patients whom he had
considered peculiarly his own, the insult plus Kenneth’s success had
rankled in his breast until, being of a petty and mean disposition, he
hated the younger man with a deep and vindictive hatred.</p>
<p>He had not, however, intended that his conversation with Ed Stewart
should assume the proportions that it eventually did. On the day before
the meeting of the Klan at which Kenneth had been named as the one
responsible for the organization of the Negroes, Dr. Williams had met Ed
Stewart driving out along a country road near Ashland. Williams was
returning from making a professional call in that  neighbourhood. Stewart, a big, raw-boned,
and lanky “Cracker” or “Peck,” as they are called by Negroes in the
South, was going to inspect the cotton crops of his tenant-farmers, that
he might estimate how big the crops would be and might know accordingly
how large the tenants’ bills should be for supplies furnished.</p>
<p>They had stopped to pass the time of day and for Stewart to find
which of the Negroes on his place was sick. He wanted to know if that
sick one was too sick to work the crop, as the loss of even one worker
during cotton-picking time was serious, what with the number of Negroes
who had gone North. Having gained the information, he started to
question Dr. Williams in a way that he thought was exceedingly adroit
and clever, but through which ruse the coloured doctor saw instantly and
clearly.</p>
<p>“Say, Doc, you know anything ‘bout these niggers ’round here holdin’
these meetin’s nearly ev’ry night? Seems t’ me it’s mighty late for them
to be holdin’ revival services and indo’ camp-meetin’s?” he queried in
as casual a tone as he could manage.</p>
<p>An idea sprang full-grown to Williams’ mind. Kenneth Harper was
getting far too popular through the organization of his co-operative
societies. Williams was shrewd enough to see that if they were as
successful as they gave promise of being, Kenneth would be the leading
Negro of the town, if not of that entire section of Georgia. And
correspondingly he, Williams, would become less and less the prominent
figure he had been before Kenneth had come  back from France to Central City. That was
it! Stewart was one of the biggest planters in Smith County. It was also
rumoured he was prominent in the Ku Klux Klan. Stewart’s fortunes would
be the hardest hit in the county if Kenneth’s societies achieved their
purpose, for he, Stewart, had as many share-croppers and tenant-farmers
as any other man in the county if not more. Stewart also had the
reputation, a long-standing one, of being the hardest taskmaster on his
Negro tenants in the county—the one who profited most through juggled
accounts and fraudulent dealings. He could have cut, had he chosen, five
notches in the handle of his gun, each one signifying a Negro who had
dared to dispute the justness of settlements for crops raised.</p>
<p>All these thoughts raced through Williams’ brain while Stewart waited
for a reply to his questions. Williams had no intention of the
exaggeration of his statements which Stewart later made. He merely
intended that by telling Stewart of the societies, Kenneth’s rapidly
increasing prominence in the community should receive a check through
obstacles which Stewart and his fellow-landlords might put—in fact, were
sure to put—in the way of success of the farmers’ organizations.</p>
<p>“No, sir, they ain’t holdin’ revivals, Mr. Stewart. I reckon if you
white folks knew what was goin’ on, you wouldn’t feel so
comfortable.”</p>
<p>Williams was playing with Stewart as is done so often by Negroes in
the South with the whites, though the latter, in their supreme
confidence that they belong to an eternally ordained “superior
race,” seldom realize how often and how easily they are taken in by
Negroes. Williams enjoyed the look of concern that had come to Stewart’s
face at his words.</p>
<p>“What’s goin’ on, Doc?” he asked in an eager tone, from which he
tried with but little success to keep the anxiety that he felt.</p>
<p>“Heh, heh, heh!” laughed Williams in a throaty chuckle. “These
Negroes are figurin’ on takin’ some of these landlords to court that’s
been cheatin’ them on their crops. Of course,” he added hastily, “that
don’t need to worry you none, Mr. Stewart, but from what I hear, there
are some ’round here that the news will worry.”</p>
<p>Stewart flushed, for he was conscious of a vague feeling that
Williams might have been indirectly hitting at him when he had said that
the court proceedings wouldn’t affect him. He fell back on the old
custom of flattering and praising fulsomely the Negro from whom a white
man wants information regarding the activities of other Negroes.
Williams, like every other Negro in the South, knew what value to put on
it, but he was playing a far deeper game than Stewart suspected.</p>
<p>“Doc, why ain’t all these niggers good, sensible ones like you? If
all the niggers in the South were like you, there never would be any
trouble.”</p>
<p>“That’s right, Mr. Stewart, that’s right. As I was sayin’ to some of
the folks out your way this mornin’, they’d better stop followin’ after
the fool ideas of these coloured men who’ve been up No’th.”</p>
<p> He looked at Stewart
shrewdly and appraisingly to see if he had penetrated the subtlety of
his remark. Stewart, slow of thought, had not fully done so, it seemed.
Williams continued:</p>
<p>“You see, it’s like this, Mr. Stewart. Folks like you and me could
live here for a hundred years and there’d never be no trouble. There’d
never be no race problem if they was only like us. But”—and his voice
took on a doubtful and sorrowful sound—“the most of this trouble we’re
havin’ is caused by fool Negroes who go up No’th to school and run
around with those coloured folks in New York and Chicago who tell ‘em
how bad we po’ coloured folks are bein’ treated in the South. They get
all filled up with ‘social equality’ ideas, and then they come back down
here and talk that stuff to these ignorant Negroes and get them all
stirred up⸺”</p>
<p>Stewart was seeing more clearly what Williams was driving at.</p>
<p>“I see,” he said reflectively. “I alw’ys said too much education
sp’iled niggers—that is, some niggers,” he added hastily for fear
Williams might take offence before he had done with him. “Co’se it don’t
bother sensible ones like you, Doc.” The last was said conciliatingly.
“Let’s see, mos’ this trouble’s stahted since that other doctor’s been
back, ain’t it?” he asked as casually as he could.</p>
<p>“I ain’t sayin’ who’s doin’ it,” replied Williams as he started the
engine of his car. “But you’re a good guesser, Mr. Stewart,” he threw
back over his shoulder as he drove away. …</p>
<p> Stewart clucked to
his horse and rode in deep thought down the road. His mind was busy
devising schemes to circumvent the action of the societies to take into
court men like himself who had been robbing Negroes. They’d lose in the
local courts, he knew, but suppose they raised enough money to take a
case to the United States Supreme Court. No, that would never do! He’d
see Parker and talk it over with him right away! He put the whip to his
horse and drove rapidly into town. Mustn’t let the damn niggers
organize, that would be hell! …</p>
<p>Kenneth was going about his business on the day following the meeting
of the Klan that had been caused by Dr. Williams’ talk with Stewart, in
blissful ignorance of the storm rapidly gathering about his head. His
mind was intent on a number of things—but trouble on account of the
co-operative societies was furthest from his mind. Had he been told
there was any trouble, such news would probably have been greeted with a
laugh of unconcern. All the white people of the South weren’t scoundrels
and thieves like Stewart and Taylor and their kind! They were but a few.
Besides the poor whites, the majority of whites would undoubtedly
heartily approve his plan when it had been developed to the point where
it could be made public.</p>
<p>But Kenneth thought of none of those things. His mind was too full of
other events that loomed on the horizon. First, of course, he thought of
Jane. He thought of his great good fortune in knowing a girl like her.
There was a girl for you! He thought of  the home he would build for her—he was
mighty glad his father had been in fairly comfortable circumstances and
that he had been successful in his practice. He would be able to build a
mighty nice home for Jane. They wouldn’t bother with the cheap and
flashy furniture, fumed oak or mission, to be obtained in Central City.
Oh, no! Soon’s Mrs. Phillips was better, the three of them would go to
Atlanta and buy everything they needed there. They’d have the
best-looking home in Central City, white or coloured! His mother and
Mamie wanted him to bring Jane into the house. He might do that … but
the house which had seemed so comfortable before, now seemed too
ordinary to bring a girl like Jane to. … He’d talk that over with her
to-night. … And then after a time there might be a little Jane … and a
Kenneth, Jr. … Kenneth laughed softly to himself as he saw Jane and
himself sitting by the fire of an evening with two little rascals
playing on the floor. … And later they’d go off to school. He’d see that
they got the best there was in life. … So his thoughts ran.</p>
<p>And then he thought of Roy Ewing and the operation of the night
before. Must have been a mighty terrible ordeal for them to have to call
a Negro in to operate on their daughter. Race prejudice is a funny
thing! A white man will eat food prepared by black hands, have it served
by black hands, have his children nursed by a black nurse who most of
the time was more a mother to them than their own mother, let his
clothes be taken into a black home to  be washed, allow all the most intimate
details of his life to be handled by black folks. … Even lots of them
would consort with black women at night to whom they wouldn’t raise
their hats in the daytime. … But when it came to recognizing a Negro
outside of menial service, then there came the rub. … Yet in a matter of
life and death like Ewing’s case, they forgot prejudice. … Maybe in time
the race problem would be solved just like that … when some great event
would wipe away the artificial lines … as in France. … He thought of the
terrible days and nights in the Argonne. … He remembered the night he
had seen a wounded black soldier and a wounded white Southern one, drink
from the same canteen. … They didn’t think about colour in those times.
… Wouldn’t the South be a happy place if this vile prejudice didn’t
exist? … He wondered why folks didn’t see it as clearly as he did. …</p>
<p>At last the long, busy day ended. He went over to have supper with
Jane. That dress she had on the night they had told each other of their
love, that reddish-coloured one, that had been a beauty. But
to-night—ah, the other one wasn’t nearly so pretty! It was of white,
simply made. Satin slippers, silk stockings, also of white. Her hair
piled high and pierced with a large tortoise-shell comb. Always she
brought pictures to Kenneth’s mind. To-night it was again of the
dark-eyed, seductive Spanish señorita on a balcony. After supper, they
sat in the canvas porch swing. They talked of their plans—impetuously,
enthusiastically—with all the glorious dreams of youthful love. All the
little things—little, but so great when one is young and in love they
said to each other. The things they said when the Pyramids were being
built. The things they will say a thousand years from now.</p>
<p>To-night there were no warning signals from Mr. Phillips when ten
o’clock came. He had been glad, and had said so, when Kenneth asked him
for Jane. “We don’t feel we’re losing a daughter—we’re gaining a son
instead!” he had said.</p>
<p>They talked on until there was no other sign of life discernible in
the neighbourhood, save for the passage of a prowling cat, or the sound
of the crickets in the grass. At last he had to go. Early the next
morning he was to leave for Atlanta with Mrs. Tucker. Three days he was
to be gone. He would return on Friday.</p>
<p>In October they were to be married. Mrs. Phillips’ health was not
improving as they had hoped. She was cheerful but she wanted Jane to be
happily married before she died. They had decided to live at his house
with his mother and Mamie. They’d refurnish it and do over all the
rooms. Later on, when he had made lots of money, they’d build.</p>
<p>Mamie and Jane and Kenneth were to go to Atlanta the latter part of
September, there to buy the furniture and all the other things, they
would need. Mrs. Phillips was too ill to stand the strain of the long
journey and the excitement of the shopping.</p>
<p>Jane tiptoed into the house so as not to wake her mother. She returned in a few minutes with a
fluffy white mass in her arms. It was her wedding-gown which she was to
make herself. They sat silent for a minute at the token of what it
meant.</p>
<p>Tears stood in Jane’s eyes when he went down the stairs. He saw them
when he looked back to say the last soft good-bye.</p>
<p>“Three days is an awful long time,” she said plaintively.</p>
<p>Of course, there was nothing else for him to do but go back up the
steps and kiss her good-bye all over again. …</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XVII
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">B</span><span class="smallcaps">ob</span> was packing for his journey to Cambridge,
whistling cheerfully the while. It was certainly great to be going away
up to Boston to school. All his life he had wanted to live there for a
while where he could learn the things which he knew of only at second
hand now. He pictured in his mind how he would arrange his life at
school. There’d be none of the kiddish pranks he had read about that
college boys did. He was too old for that. He had seen too much of the
seamy and sordid side of life to waste his time playing. He’d study
every minute he could. He’d make a record in scholarship that would make
his mother and Mamie and Kenneth proud of him. He’d go to summer school
so as to finish the rest of his college course in two years instead of
three. And then, law school. By jiminy, he’d be the best lawyer there
was! Not the best coloured lawyer. The best lawyer! Never did youth have
more brilliant dreams of life than Bob. He paused at the sound which
came from downstairs through the half-opened door. It couldn’t be in
Ken’s office, for he had gone to Atlanta with Mrs. Tucker that morning.
It sounded like crying—as one would cry who had suffered some great
bereavement or terrible
misfortune. He went out in the hall and leaned over the balustrade, the
better to find out what was the matter.</p>
<p>It was Mamie and his mother. He looked puzzled, for he could think of
nothing to make Mamie cry that way. His mother was trying to soothe and
calm her as Mamie told her the cause of her weeping. Bob crept down the
stairs as softly as he could to hear.</p>
<p>Mamie between sobs was telling her mother of some accident that had
befallen her.</p>
<p>“I had been—to Ewing’s Store and that Jim Archer—and Charley
Allen—and two or three other white boys—that hang around Ewing’s
Store—said nasty things to me when I came out—I hurried home they must
have followed me.”</p>
<p>Here she broke down again while her mother crooned softly to her,
pleading with her not to cry so hard. Mamie choked back her sobs and
went on. Bob’s face became terrible to see. He hung there on the steps
almost breathless, waiting, and dreading what he felt was coming.</p>
<p>“At that old field-near the railroad—they jumped out—and grabbed me
oh, my God! My God! Why didn’t they kill me? Why didn’t they kill me?”
Mamie’s screams were horrible to hear. “Then—oh, God! God help me!”</p>
<p>For a minute Bob stood there as one frozen to the spot. Then a blind,
unreasoning fury filled him. He ran up the stairs to Kenneth’s room and
got the  revolver he
knew Kenneth kept there. Without hat or coat he ran down the stairs. Out
the door and down the street. Mamie and her mother were roused by his
action. Mamie, lying on the floor with her head in her mother’s lap, her
clothes torn and bloody, her face and body bruised, struggled to her
feet. She ran to the open door through which Bob had disappeared. An
even greater terror, if such was possible, was on her face.</p>
<p>“Bob! Bob! Come back! Come back!” she cried in ever louder cries.</p>
<p>“Bob! Bob!”</p>
<p>But Bob was too far away to hear her.</p>
<div class="break">
</div>
<p>In front of Ewing’s Store there sat a group of nine or ten men and
boys. They were gathered around one who seemed to be relating a highly
interesting and humorous story. Every few minutes there’d be a loud
laugh and a slapping of each other on the back. Suddenly, silence. A
hatless and coatless figure was running down the street toward them. The
group opened as its members started to scatter. In the middle of it
there stood Jim Archer and Charley Allen. The former had been telling
the story.</p>
<p>Bob walked straight up to Jim Archer, whose face had turned even
paler than its usual pasty colour. He turned to run but it was too late.
Without saying a word, his eyes burning with a deadly hatred, Bob raised
the revolver he had in his hand and fired once—twice—into Archer’s
breast. Charley Allen 
rushed upon Bob to overpower him. He met head-on the two bullets that
came to meet him, and fell gasping and coughing on the ground at Bob’s
feet.</p>
<p>The rest of the crowd had fled.</p>
<p>Without hurrying, Bob stepped into a Ford delivery truck that had
been left at the curb, its engine running. Before the crowd which with
miraculous suddenness filled the street could stop him, he drove
straight down Lee Street, turned into Oglethorpe Avenue, and headed for
the country beyond the town. …</p>
<p>Three miles out of town the Ford spluttered, coughed, shook mightily,
and stopped. Its gasolene tank was empty. Shoving it into the underbrush
on the side of the road, far enough to be out of sight, Bob ran on. If
he could only get across country as far as the railroad going North, he
might be able to get to Macon, where he could hide. When the excitement
died down, he could go on farther North. Perhaps he could eventually
reach Canada. He fought his way through brushes, across vast fields of
cotton that seemed to have no end. Near midnight he could go no farther.
He had eaten nothing since breakfast—he had been too excited over his
packing to eat any dinner. Bitterly he thought of the change a few hours
had brought forth. Twelve hours before, he had been eagerly planning to
leave for school. Now, his sister ruined, he a murderer twice
over—fleeing for his life! He hoped that he had killed both of them! It
would be too ironical a fate for them to live. … He thought for a moment
 of what would happen if
they caught him. He put the thought away from him. God, that was too
terrible! Mustn’t think of that! I’ll lose my nerve. …</p>
<p>What was that? Lord, he must have fallen asleep! What is that? Dogs?
Bloodhounds! Great God!</p>
<p>I must get away! How did they get away from bloodhounds in books?
That was it! Water!</p>
<p>He’d find a stream and wade in it. Then the damned dogs would lose
the scent.</p>
<p>The thought of water reminded him suddenly that he was
thirsty—terribly thirsty. God, but his throat was dry! Felt like ten
thousand hot needles were sticking in it!</p>
<p>His legs and thighs ached. He dragged them along like a paralysed
man. He thought petulantly of a paralysed man he had seen once in
Atlanta. What was his name? Bill? No, that wasn’t it. Jim? No, not that
either. Some sort of a name like that.</p>
<p>Wonder how Mamie was? Mamie? Who’s Mamie? What had happened to her?
He racked his brain to remember. At last he gave it up. No use trying.
Old—old—brain don’t work right.</p>
<p>Wonder what’s the matter with it?</p>
<p>His delirious brain was suddenly cleared by an ominous baying close
at hand. Those damned dogs again. They’d never take him alive! He felt
in his pockets to see if the gun was still there. It was. He felt in the
other pocket to count the cartridges there while he ran.
One—two—three—four—five—six—seven—eight! All there! Seven for the
mob! One—for—Bob!</p>
<p>An old barn suddenly loomed up before him in the rapidly approaching
light of dawn. He dragged himself into it and barred the door. Not much
protection! But—a little! Just a little! Better’n none! He sat down on
an old box by the door, There was a knot-hole farther over. He dragged
the box in front of it. Reloaded the revolver. One—two—three—four
cartridges! Two that hadn’t been used! That left six in the gun! And
four more! Listen! The dogs sound like they’re near!</p>
<p>There they are! He wouldn’t waste his precious bullets on dogs! Oh,
no! He’d save them for the human dogs! God damn ’em! He’d show ’em a
“damned nigger” knew how to die! Like a man! Here they come! God, but it
was tough to have to die! Just when life seemed so sweet! Wonder who’d
sit in his seat at Harvard! Hope a coloured boy’d get it! Harvard seemed
so far away from where he was! Looked like it was as far’s the moon!
Might as well be for him!</p>
<p>Look at ’em spreading out! Whyn’t they come up like men and get him?
There’s Jim Archer’s brother! Bang! Got him! Look at ’im squirm!</p>
<p>That’s two Archers won’t run after coloured girls any more! Bang!
Damn it, I missed ’im! Can’t waste ’em like that! Got to be more
careful! Must take better aim next time! Bang! Bang! Hell, I missed
again! Nope! Got one of ’em!</p>
<p>One—two—three—four gone! Six left! Five  for the “Crackers”! One for me! Bang!
Bang!</p>
<p>Got another! Must reload! One—two—three four! Nearly all gone!
Five—ten—fifteen minutes to live! Why did they pick on Mamie?</p>
<p>Whyn’t they take one of those girls that live in those houses on
Butler Street? That’s always running around after men? Why’d they bother
a nice girl like Mamie?</p>
<p>Bang! Listen at ’im howl? That’s music for you! Listen to the damn
“Peck” squalling!</p>
<p>What’s th’ matter? Looks like they’ve gone! Wonder if I can make a
run for it? Th’ damn cowards! Fifty—one hundred—a thousand—five
thousand—to one! That’s the way “Crackers” always fight coloured folks!
Never heard yet of one “Cracker” fighting one Negro! Have to have
thousan’ to kill one little fellow like Bob Harper!</p>
<p>Smoke? Can’t be smoke! Yes, it is! Goin’ t’ burn me up! Bang! Bang!
Got one of ’em!</p>
<p>My God! Only one bullet left! Never take him alive! Lynch him! Might
burn him! Burned coloured boy last month ’n Texas! Better not let ’em
get him! Good-bye, everybody! Good-bye!</p>
<p>Good-bye! Good⸺ Bang …</p>
<p>It was some time after Bob had died before the posse dared enter the
barn which by this time was burning rapidly. They feared the cessation
of firing was only a ruse to draw them into the open. At last, after
riddling the burning structure with bullets, a few of the more daring
cautiously approached the barn, entered, and found Bob’s body. After the
bullet from his own gun
had entered his head, killing him instantly, his body had fallen
backwards from the box on which he had been sitting. His legs were
resting on the box, his thighs vertical, his body on the floor and his
head slightly tilted forward as it rested against a cow-stall. His arms
were widespread. The empty revolver lay some ten feet away, where he had
flung it as he fell backwards. His face was peaceful. On it was a
sardonic smile as though he laughed in death at cheating the howling
pack of the satisfaction of killing him.</p>
<p>The mob dragged the body hastily into the open. The roof of the old
barn was about to fall in. Before dragging it forth, they had taken no
chances. A hundred shots were fired into the dead body. Partly in anger
at being cheated of the joy of killing him themselves. They tied it to
the rear axle of a Ford. Howling, shouting gleefully, the voice of the
pack after the kill, they drove rapidly back to town, the dead body,
riddled and torn, bumping grotesquely over the holes in the road. …</p>
<p>Back to the public square. In the open space before the Confederate
Monument, wood and excelsior had been piled. Near by stood cans of
kerosene. On the crude pyre they threw the body. Saturated it and the
wood with oil. A match applied. In the early morning sunlight the fire
leaped higher and higher. Mingled with the flames and smoke the exulting
cries of those who had done their duty—they had avenged and upheld white
civilization. …</p>
<p>The flames died down. Women, tiny boys and  girls, old men and young stood by, a
strange light on their faces. They sniffed eagerly the odour of burning
human flesh which was becoming more and more faint.</p>
<p>… Into the dying flames darted a boy of twelve. Out he came, laughing
hoarsely, triumphantly exhibiting a charred bone he had secured,
blackened and crisp. … Another rushed in. … Another. … Another. … Here a
rib. … There an armbone. … A louder cry. … The skull. … Good boy!
Johnny! … We’ll put that on the mantelpiece at home. … Five dollars for
it, Johnny! … Nothin’ doin’! … Goin’ to keep it myself! …</p>
<p>The show ended. The crowd dispersed. Home to breakfast.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XVIII
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">T</span><span class="smallcaps">hree</span> men sat around a table that evening in the
office of Sheriff Parker in the court-house. The sheriff was one.
Another was Commissioner Henry Lane. The third was Ed Stewart.</p>
<p>The latter was talking.</p>
<p>“Yep, after I talked to that nigger Williams, I rustled ‘round among
the niggers on my place. At fust, they wouldn’t talk much. But I found a
way to make ’em! By God, a taste of a horse-whip’ll make any of ’em open
up! Found they’s only two niggers we got to worry ’bout. One’s this
nigger doctor. The other’s my nigger Tom Tracy. She’ff, if you hear’n
tell of an accident out to my place in the nex’ few days, you needn’t
bother to come out to investigate. It’ll be se’f-defence. Tom Tracy’s
goin’t come up on me with an open knife. I’m goin’ t’ shoot t’ save my
life.”</p>
<p>The three laughed at the good joke. The sheriff agreed not to bother.
“Good riddance!” he commented.</p>
<p>Stewart went on:</p>
<p>“Now ‘bout this other nigger. He’s the brains of the whole thing. But
we’ve got to be mighty careful, ’cause these other niggers thinks he
some sort of a tin god. Ef they think he’s bumped off ’cause of these
lodges he’s been organizing, they might raise  hell. Ev’ry nigger out my way would go
through hell ’n’ high water for him. Never seen ‘em think so much of
another nigger befo’. Mos’ the time they’ll come and tell me ev’rythin’
that any them other niggers doin’. This nigger Harper’s got ‘em hoodooed
or somethin’.”</p>
<p>The sheriff broke into Stewart’s monologue in a complaining,
reminiscent fashion:</p>
<p>“Don’t know what’s gettin’ into the niggers nowadays. They ain’t like
they useter be. Take this nigger’s daddy, f’r example. Old man Harper
was as good a nigger’s I ever seen. If he met you on the street twenty
times a day, he’d take off his hat ’n’ bow almos’ to the groun’ ev’ry
time. But these new niggers, I can’t make heads nor tails of ‘em. Take
that uppity nigger they burned this mornin’. Always goin’ ’round with a
face on ’im like he’s swallowed a mess of crabapples. What if that Jim
Archer did have a little fun with the nigger’s sister? ’Twon’t hurt a
nigger wench none. Oughter be proud a white man wants her.”</p>
<p>His voice took on at the next remark a tone of pained and outraged
surprise.</p>
<p>“Nigger gals gettin’ so nowadays they think they’re’s good as white
women! And what ‘chu think that old fool Judge Stev’nson said t’ me
to-day? Had the nerve t’ sayt’ me that he don’t blame that nigger Bob
for killin’ Jim Archer!”</p>
<p>He demanded of his companions in an almost ludicrous surprise:
“What’s goin’t come of the South when <i>white men</i> like the judge
say such things?  Guess
he’s gettin’ so old he’s kind of weak in the head! I tol’ him he’d
better not say that to nobody else. Somethin’ might happen to
<i>him!</i>”</p>
<p>“Damn Judge Stevenson!” broke in Stewart, anxious to get a chance to
tell his story. “He alw’ys was a sort of ‘nigger-lover’ anyway!”</p>
<p>Henry Lane spoke for the first time.</p>
<p>“Reck’n the Gov’nor’d say anythin’ ‘bout this burnin’?” he asked in a
tone that anticipated the answer.</p>
<p>Parker laughed ironically.</p>
<p>“What kin he do?” he demanded. He answered his own question.
“Nothin’! Under the laws of Georgy, he can’t even sen’ a man down here
to investigate unless he’s officially asked by citizens of th’ county!
And who’s goin’ t’ ask him?” He laughed again. “If anybody’s fool enough
to ask him, they’ll be havin’ a visit paid ‘em one of these nights!
Reck’n we don’t need to bother none ’bout the Gov’non meddlin’ in our
affairs,” he ended assuredly.</p>
<p>“Le’s get back to this Harper nigger ’n’ quit all this foolin’
’round,” Stewart demanded, irritably. “How’re we goin’ t’ settle him?”
He added, after a pause: “Without stirrin’ up the niggers all over the
county?”</p>
<p>“An’ they ain’t all we got to look out for,” added Sheriff Parker.
“They’s some white folks ’round here who’ll kick up a stink if we ain’t
careful.” “Who’ll do that?” asked Stewart contemptuously. “Judge
Stev’nson can’t do it all by hisse’f.” “Well, there’s him an old Baird
an’ Fred Griswold. An’
then the one’s mos’ likely to raise the mos’ fuss is Roy Ewing. He
thinks a lot of that nigger lately for some reas’n. Ain’t been able t’
figger it out as yet, but he sets a heap by him.” He scratched his head
in an abstracted manner. “Tol me over t’ the sto’ yestiddy that this
Harper’s a fine type of nigger t’ have ‘round Central City ’n’ that we
oughter encourage other niggers to be like him.”</p>
<p>“Another one gettin’ ol and weak-minded befo’ his time!” was
Stewart’s comment. “But I want t’ know if we’re goin’ to sit here all
night talkin’ ‘bout things that’s goin’ t’ keep us from punishin’ this
nigger or if we’re goin’ to get down to business. Fust thing we know,
we’ll be ‘lectin’ this nigger mayer the town!” His sarcasm was thinly
veiled, if veiled at all. Parker and Lane showed by the sudden flush on
their faces that the shot had reached its mark.</p>
<p>“You don’t have to be so cantankerous ’bout it, Ed.” Parker showed in
his voice, as well as on his face, that he didn’t particularly care for
Stewart’s brand of irony. “You know we’re jus’ as anxious as you to get
rid of him. But we got to be careful. You live out in the country ‘n’
you don’t know the situation here in town like me ‘n’ Henry.”</p>
<p>He sat meditatively for a time. Stewart fidgeted in his chair, and
Henry Lane sat lost in thought. Parker suddenly sat up eagerly.</p>
<p>“I got it!” he exclaimed. The others looked at him inquiringly.</p>
<p>“We’ll fix it so’s we can say that Harper insulted a white
woman!”</p>
<p> His companions
looked slightly disappointed and doubtful.</p>
<p>“How’re you goin’ t’ do that?” asked Lane. “This nigger, as fur’s I
can see, since he been back’s been stayin’ out where he b’longs in the
nigger section. Only time he comes over this way’s when he comes to the
bank or the sto’ or here to th’ court-house. That’s one thing I can say
in his fav’r! Bein’in France ain’t sp’iled him none so fur’s white
women’s concerned. If he ran around with them Frog women, he never tried
any of it ’round here.”</p>
<p>“It ain’t necessary for him to bother with white women in Central
City for us to put that on ’im,” Parker declared defensively. “Nearly
all white folks ev’n up No’th b’lieves that ev’ry time a nigger’s
lynched down this a way, its ’cause he’s raped a white woman.” His
manner became triumphant. “Here’s how we’ll fix it.”</p>
<p>The three men, although they were alone in the dark court-house and
there was none to hear, drew their chairs together. Their heads were
close for more than ten minutes, while they talked excitedly together.
Occasionally there would be a low burst of laughter—again an oath. At
last Stewart rose, took a paper-bound book from the desk, copied for
some time from it, and left the court-house.</p>
<p>The next morning each of fifteen “white, Protestant, Gentile”
citizens of Central City received a letter. There was no writing of any
sort on the envelope save their names and addresses. They were of
ordinary quality such as can be purchased at five  cents a package in any cheap stationery
store. In it was a letter typed on plain paper, of a quality to match
the cheapness of the envelope. There was no printing of any sort on the
letter, nor was it addressed other than: “Dear Sir.” It read:</p>
<div class="article">
<p>“DEAR SIR:</p>
<p>“You have been chosen, as one known to be loyal, brave, and discreet,
to meet a situation affecting the welfare of the Nation, the State, and
the Community. You are hereby commanded to be present at the time and
place and date given on the enclosed card.</p>
<p>“Be wise! Be discreet! Discuss this with no one! Fail not!</p>
<div class="alignright">
“THE COMMITTEE.”
</div>
</div>
<p>There was a plain card enclosed, also of cheap and easily obtained
quality, on which was typed a date, time, and place. …</p>
<p><i>Mirabile dictu</i>, each of the fifteen recipients of this cryptic
missive was a Ku Klux Klansman. …</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XIX
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">M</span><span class="smallcaps">rs.
Tucker</span> was operated on at Atlanta on Thursday morning at the
Auburn Infirmary, owned and conducted by a group of coloured physicians
of that city, as none of them could operate in the white hospitals.
Kenneth keenly enjoyed being in a hospital again, with all its
conveniences. The operation finished and Mrs. Tucker resting easily, he
purchased, after much picking and choosing, Jane’s engagement ring—a
beautiful, blue-white diamond solitaire.</p>
<p>That important task performed, he telephoned Dr. Scott, to whom Judge
Stevenson had given him a letter of introduction. So engrossed had he
been in the operation and the purchasing of the ring, he had almost
forgotten the promise made to the judge to see and talk with Dr. Scott,
known to be a liberal leader of Southern public opinion and one deeply
concerned with the problem of race relations.</p>
<p>“That’s a mighty intelligent plan you’ve worked out,” Dr. Scott
boomed over the wire. “I’d like to have you talk that over with me and
one or two others here. Can you do it before going home?”</p>
<p>Kenneth told him he had to leave early next morning for Central City.
As Dr. Scott had a meeting  that would keep him engaged all afternoon,
it was decided that they should meet that evening at an office in a
building downtown in the business section.</p>
<p>It was with a deal of eagerness—and with some degree of anxiety, for
he did not know how he would be received by Dr. Scott and the
others—that Kenneth set forth that evening for the meeting. He found
three men awaiting him in the office of John Anthony, who was one of the
three. His footsteps echoed in ghostlike fashion as he walked down the
hallway of the deserted building. From the open window there floated
from the street below the subdued clatter of automobiles, the cries of
newsboys, the restless shuffling of the leisurely crowd as it moved up
and down Peachtree Street. Kenneth sought to weigh the three, who were,
he felt, representatives of that “new South” of which so much was heard,
but signs of whose activities he had so seldom seen. He was seeking to
find out their motives, their plans of accomplishing that spirit of fair
play toward the Negro, to determine how far they would go towards
challenging the established order that was damning the South
intellectually, morally, economically. Kenneth, with too-high ideals for
his environment, was almost naïve in his eager search for the great
champion he had dreamed of who would brave danger and contumely and even
death itself for a newer and brighter day for his people in the South.
That hope had been dulled somewhat by the things he had seen since his
return to Central City, for he was not of an unreflective mind. Yet he
had not seen far  enough
beneath the surface of that volcano of passion and hate and greed which
is the South to realize that the South had never produced a martyr to
any great moral cause one who had possessed sufficient courage to
oppose, regardless of consequences, any one of the set, dogmatic beliefs
of the South. True it was that there were some who had fought in the
Civil War with firm belief that the South was right—even though it had
been shown that their idealism was a perverted one. But even then these
had moved with the tide of sectional sentiment and not against it.</p>
<p>Educated in Southern schools where the text-books of history always
exalted the leaders of the Confederacy, raising Lee and Jackson and
Johnston and Gordon to heights but little lower than the heroes of
Grecian mythology, and ever tending to disparage and revile the Union
cause and its leaders, Kenneth, like many coloured youths, had accepted
the readymade and fallacious estimates set before him. It was,
therefore, but natural that he set his hopes for stalwart, unafraid
leadership too high and, at the same time, failed to realize that the
South had never begotten an Abraham Lincoln, a Garrison, a Sumner, or
even a meteor-like John Brown, bursting into brilliance born of
indignation against stupidity or ignorance or wrong and dying gloriously
for that cause. Kenneth’s eyes had partially been opened by his
memorable talk with Judge Stevenson. Etched upon his mind by the acid of
bitter truths were the judge’s words that the boasted Anglo-Saxonism of
the South  had curdled
into moral cowardice on all subjects by the repression incident to the
race problem. Nevertheless Kenneth was too inexperienced as yet in the
ways of life to comprehend the full import of the older man’s cynicism.
He yet sought him who would fulfil his ideal of a great leader who, like
a latter-day Crusader, would guide white and black together out of the
impasse in which the South seemed to be. Kenneth thus anxiously examined
the three before him to see if by chance any one of them bore the
accolade which would stamp him the Moses that he sought.</p>
<p>Naturally enough, his eyes first went to Dr. Scott, as it was of him
that Judge Stevenson had spoken most favourably. Minister to one of the
larger Atlanta churches, he had spoken frequently and with considerable
vigour for Georgia in behalf of greater kindness and fairness toward the
Negro. He was very tall. His more than ordinary height with his
attenuated and lanky slenderness gave him an almost cadaverous
appearance which the loose suit of black mohair he wore accentuated.
From beneath the folds of a low collar there sprang a white
starched-linen bow tie, the four ends standing stiffly, each in a
separate direction, like the arms of a windmill. His rather large head
was bald on top but around the edges ran a fringe of yellowish-white
hair with curling ends that made his face appear rounder than it was.
Bushy eyebrows shaded pale blue eyes that twinkled in unison with the
ready smile which revealed large yellow teeth. Into his conversation Dr.
 Scott injected at
frequent intervals ministerial phrases—“the spirit of Jesus”—“being
Christians”—“our Lord and Saviour.” He always addressed his white
companions as “Brother Anthony” and “Brother Gordon.” Kenneth he always
called “Doctor.”</p>
<p>Kenneth felt a certain doubt of Dr. Scott’s sincerity. He tried to
penetrate what seemed to be a mask over the minister’s face that
effectively hid all that revolved in the mind behind it. Something
intangible but nevertheless real blocked his path—an unctuous affability
that seemed too oily to be sincere. No, Kenneth reflected, Dr. Scott is
not the man. All of this examination had taken but a few seconds, yet
Kenneth’s mind was made up. In prejudging him so hastily, Kenneth did an
injustice to Dr. Scott that was unconscious but real. In his heart of
hearts Dr. Scott had realized that to accomplish anything at all in the
South towards enlightenment he must necessarily become, at least as
discretion seemed to dictate, a mental chameleon. He had suffered
because of that decision, for had circumstances placed him in a more
liberal and intelligent environment, he would have been far more
advanced in his religious and other beliefs. The traces of gold in the
ore that was his mind had been revealed in the suffering which had come
to him through his speaking out against a system that seemed to him
wrong.</p>
<p>He had been reviled, misunderstood both deliberately and by those who
were not so advanced as he. He had borne in silence whatever had come to
him,  even threats of
tarring and of death from the Ku Klux Klan, seeking a course directed by
wisdom if not by valour.</p>
<p>While he was being introduced by Dr. Scott, Kenneth examined
critically the other two men. Mr. Anthony, who had volunteered the use
of his office for the conference, as no comment would be likely if the
four of them were seen in the office building, was first presented.</p>
<p>John Anthony might well have posed as model for a typical American
business man or lawyer. Of rotund figure, well-fed appearance, hair
close-cut, his face clean-shaven, clad in neatly tailored but
undistinguished clothing, he sat leaning slightly forward, his fingers
interlocked, his thumbs and forefingers holding his cravat while his
elbows rested on the arms of his chair. He acknowledged the introduction
to Kenneth with a brief “Pleased t’ meetcha.” He did not rise, nor
extend his hand in greeting, but he at once shrewdly appraised and
catalogued Kenneth. John Anthony’s interest in interracial affairs had
been first aroused by the war-time migration of Negroes to the North.
His personal fortunes had been touched directly by this loss of labour,
and the resultant decrease in profits had caused him to inquire into the
problem of the labourers who had been always so plentiful. Like most
Americans, and particularly those in Southern States, he had had no idea
of, or interest in, what Negroes were forced to endure. Though near to
this problem, he had been a living example of those in the proverb who
“live so  close to the
trees, they cannot see the woods.” His inquiry, conducted with the
clear-sightedness and energy he had acquired from long business
training, had revealed brutalities and vicious exploitation that had
amazed and sickened him. He was too shrewd to believe that Negroes would
be restrained from leaving the South by attempts to picture Negroes
freezing to death in the North, or to try to beguile them by transparent
falsehoods to the effect that the Southern white man is the Negro’s best
friend. Though he did not voice it save to his more intimate friends, he
felt naught but contempt for the hypocrisy of those who too late were
attempting to flatter the Negro to keep him in the South. His motives
were therefore curiously mixed in his support of efforts toward
interracial goodwill. Economic in part were they, because retention of
Negro labour meant the continuation of his own successful business
career. Equally, almost, did they proceed from a hitherto latent sense
of moral indignation against the treatment which the South had accorded
to Negroes in the past. Direct of speech, analytical of mind, he went
straight to the heart of the problem with that same perspicacity that
had won for him more than usual success in his business of conducting
one of the South’s largest department stores.</p>
<p>Here again did Kenneth figuratively shake his head and decide that
John Anthony was not destined to be the Moses of the new South. He could
not for the life of him dissociate Anthony’s interest in behalf of
justice from his direct financial interest in  keeping Negroes in the South, where, with
the inevitable working of the law of demand and supply, a surplusage of
Negro labour would mean continued high profits for men like Anthony.
Kenneth was too young to know that the more largely a man profits from a
liberal cause, the more loyal will be his support of that cause and the
lesser likelihood of his defection when difficulties arise.</p>
<p>Of the three men, Kenneth felt greatest hope in the third—David
Gordon—younger than Kenneth, alert, capable, and with an engaging
frankness of face and of manner to which Kenneth warmed instinctively.
Gordon was a graduate of Harvard, where he for the first time in his
life had learned to know coloured fellow-students as men and human
beings instead of as “niggers.” At first he had rebelled strenuously,
his every instinct had revolted against dining in the same room, however
large, with a “nigger.” So indignant had he been that he had taken it up
with the president. Benign, kindly, clearheaded, and patriarchal, the
older man calmly and dispassionately and without rancour had shown
Gordon the injustice of his position—how unfair it was to deny an
education to a man for the sole offence of having been born with a black
skin. Before he quite knew how it had happened, Gordon found himself
ashamed of what now was seen to be petty nastiness on his part. So
interested had he become after his eyes were thus opened that he had
made a special study of the Negro problem. After finishing both his
college and law courses, he had returned to  Atlanta to practise law with his father.
His interest in the race question had increased since his return. He was
now one of that liberal and intelligent few who are most free from
prejudice an emancipated Southerner. Some inner voice told Kenneth
instantly that greatest hope of the three lay in David Gordon—and men
like him. …</p>
<p>The introductions completed, Dr. Scott opened the conversation.</p>
<p>“Doctor, we’ve heard of the society you’ve started in Central City.
Tell us how you’re getting along.”</p>
<p>“You have heard of it?” asked Kenneth in surprise. He did not know
his fame had preceded him.</p>
<p>“Oh, yes,” answered Dr. Scott. “You see, I know a man in the Klan
headquarters here. They’ve got, so I understand, a pretty full account
of your movements.”</p>
<p>“They honour me,” laughed Kenneth, a note of irony in his voice. He
was not a physical coward—threats bothered him little. He had paid
little attention to the report of the Klan meeting at Central City,
though it had worried his mother and Bob considerably. No more would he
be perturbed by any reports of his activities the Klan might have in
their files.</p>
<p>“Then, too, Judge Stevenson’s been writing me about you,” continued
Dr. Scott. “We are all interested in what you’re doing, Doctor, and we
want you to talk frankly. You can to us,” he added.</p>
<p>The three men were genuinely interested in the  plan on which Kenneth was working. They
were too intelligent to fail to see that something would have to be done
towards adjustment of race relations in the South to avert an inevitable
clash. What that something was they did not know. They felt the time was
not ripe for a challenge to the existing order, and they would not, in
all probability, have been willing to issue such a fiat had the time
been propitious. Yet they were anxious to examine the plans of this
coloured man, hoping against hope that therein might lie an easy
solution of the problem.</p>
<p>Frankly and clearly Kenneth told of the simple scheme. Occasionally
one of his hearers would interrupt him with a question, but for the most
part they heard him through in silence. The story ended, the three men
sat in silence as each revolved in his mind the possibilities of the
plan. John Anthony was the first to speak, and then he approached the
whole race problem instead of Kenneth’s plan for attacking one phase of
it.</p>
<p>“Doctor,” asked Mr. Anthony, “do you believe there is any solution to
the race problem? Just what is the immediate way out, as you see
it?”</p>
<p>“It would take a wiser man than I to answer that,” laughed Kenneth.
“You see, we’re in the habit of thinking that we can find a simple A-B-C
solution for any given problem, and the trouble is there are mighty few
that are simple enough for that.”</p>
<p>“Yes—yes—I know all that,” interjected Mr. Anthony, rather testily.
“What I want to hear is what you, as an intelligent Negro, think. I want
you to  tell us exactly
what men like you are saying among yourselves.”</p>
<p>“Well, we’re talking about lynching—poor schools—the way Negroes are
denied the ballot in the South” began Kenneth.</p>
<p>“Er—that’s a thing we can’t discuss,” hastily interrupted Dr. Scott.
“Conditions in the South are too unsettled to talk about giving the
Negro the vote as yet.”</p>
<p>“As yet,” echoed Kenneth. “If we can’t discuss it now, when can we
talk about it?”</p>
<p>“It’ll be a long time,” answered Dr. Scott frankly. “There are a lot
of white people in the South who know disfranchisement is wrong. We know
that we can’t keep the ballot from the Negro always. But,” he ended with
a shrug of his shoulders and a thrust-ing-out of his hands, palms
upward, in a gesture of perplexity and despair Kenneth was learning to
know so well that he was associating it instinctively with the Southern
white man, “we’d stir up more trouble than we could cope with.”</p>
<p>“And while you’re waiting for the opportune time, conditions are
getting steadily worse, the problem is getting more complicated, and
it’ll be harder to solve the longer you put off trying to solve it,”
urged Kenneth. It was with an effort that he kept out of his voice the
impatience he felt. “Why don’t men like you three band together with
those who think as you do, so you can speak out?” he asked.</p>
<p>“That’s just what we are trying to do, but we have to go very
cautiously,” answered Dr. Scott. “We  must use discretion. How much are Negroes
thinking about voting?”</p>
<p>“They think about it all the time,” replied Kenneth. “We know the
mere casting of a ballot isn’t going to solve all our problems, but we
also know we’ll never be able to do much until we do vote.”</p>
<p>“You must be patient—wait until the time is ripe⸺” cautioned
Dr. Scott.</p>
<p>“Patience can be a vice as well as a virtue.” It was David Gordon who
spoke.</p>
<p>Kenneth looked at him gratefully.</p>
<p>“Your race’s greatest asset,” continued Dr. Scott, addressing his
remark to Kenneth, yet seeking to impart a gentle rebuke to Gordon, “has
been its wonderful gentleness under oppression. You must continue to be
sweet-tempered and patient⸺”</p>
<p>“That’s all very well to advise, but how would you or any other white
man act if you had to suffer the things the Negro has had to suffer?”
demanded Kenneth. “Suppose you saw your women made the breeding-ground
of every white man who desires them, saw your men lynched and burned at
the stake, saw your race robbed and cheated, lied to and lied about,
despised, persecuted, oppressed—how would you feel, Dr. Scott, if
somebody came to you and said: ‘Be patient’?”</p>
<p>Kenneth poured forth his words like a burning flood of
lava—indicative of the raging fires of resentment smouldering beneath.
He paused, completely out of breath. Dr. Scott flushed until his face
became a dull brick-red in colour. He restrained  with an effort the anger caused by the
coloured man’s impetuous words.</p>
<p>“I know—I know,” he said soothingly. “It’s hard, I know, but you must
remember the words of Jesus to his disciples: ‘When men shall persecute
and revile you⸺’ The spirit of Jesus is growing in the hearts of the
South—it will come to your rescue in due season.”</p>
<p>“We’re always hearing about this liberal white opinion,” rejoined
Kenneth, nettled by the unctuous suavity of the words, “but we so seldom
see any signs of it—almost never in places like Central City. Sometimes
I think it’s like trying to put your finger on mercury—when your finger
is about to touch it, it rolls away—it’s somewhere else. Meanwhile
lynching goes on.”</p>
<p>“You’re right, Doctor,” broke in John Anthony, who had been following
the conversation with deep interest though he had taken little part in
it. “We’ve got to do something, and that soon—the only problem is how to
do it. Now about your society in Smith County—tell us how we can help
you make it a success. Do you need any money to get it working
properly?”</p>
<p>Kenneth turned to the quiet man who had proposed the first tangible
offer to help.</p>
<p>“Thanks a lot for the offer,” replied Kenneth. “There are two things
I can think of that’ll be immediately helpful. One is that you and
Dr. Scott and Mr. Gordon do what you can to help mould public sentiment so this liberal
white opinion will become a force in the South against the Ku Klux Klan
and lynching and all the other forms of prejudice. That’s what seems to
me to be most needed.”</p>
<p>“Yes—yes—I agree with you, but tell us just exactly how we can help
you.” Anthony, in his direct way, was impatient of theorizing. “Do you
need any money—credit—legal advice—that is, any we can give quietly
without it getting out that we gave it?”</p>
<p>“Yes, there is something,” answered Kenneth. “Most of the men in our
societies have been working on shares for so many years that instead of
having any money, they owe their landlords large sums. The big problem
is credit for the things they need until they sell their crops next
fall.”</p>
<p>Kenneth gave a detailed statement of their needs and their plans.
John Anthony took notes as he talked and agreed to see what he could do
towards securing credit when they needed it. David Gordon volunteered
his aid as a lawyer. They rose to go. Anthony gazed intently at Kenneth
as he asked gravely:</p>
<p>“Doctor, have you thought of the possibility of—er—trouble if your
motives are not understood? That is, suppose some of the poor whites are
stirred up by the landlords and merchants you’re trying to take these
coloured farmers away from—have you figured out what might be the
result?”</p>
<p>“Yes, I have,” responded Kenneth. “I realize  there might be some who’d break up our
groups⸺”</p>
<p>“No—No—I mean to you personally,” interjected Anthony.</p>
<p>“I don’t think they’ll bother me,” was Kenneth’s confident reply.
“But if something should happen—well, if I can feel I’ve perhaps pointed
a way out for my people, I can die happy. … At any rate, killing or
running me away wouldn’t kill the spirit of revolt these coloured people
have it might stir it even higher. Not that I’ve any ambition for
martyrdom,” he ended with a laugh.</p>
<p>Kenneth spoke with no bravado, with none of the cant of the poseur.
His words, rather, were uttered with the simplicity of the earnest
seeker after truth—the unheroic but sincere worker in a cause that is
just.</p>
<p>“Let’s hope you’ll come through,” said Anthony. “I’m a Southerner
with all the traditions and prejudices of the South, but I wish you
luck.” He added after a pause: “You’ll need it.”</p>
<p>After Kenneth had gone, the three men looked at each other
questioningly.</p>
<p>“What do you think of him and his plan?” asked Dr. Scott, half to
himself.</p>
<p>It was Gordon who answered.</p>
<p>“It’s a good scheme—if it works. I’m mighty afraid, though, he’s
going to run into deep water if his societies grow very large. And the
pity of it is that we in Atlanta can’t help him if we dared.” Anthony
grunted.</p>
<p> “And yet the South
is trying to solve the race problem and leave educated Negroes like
Harper entirely out of the equation. It’s about time we woke up.”</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XX
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">E</span><span class="smallcaps">arly</span> Friday morning Kenneth left for Central
City, before the Atlanta <i>Constitution</i> appeared on the streets for
sale. Soon after his train left Macon on the way South, the engine blew
out a cylinder head. They remained there until another could be
dispatched from Macon to replace it. There had come to his
stopping-place in Atlanta, a few minutes after he had left, a telegram
which had been sent from a town twenty miles distant from Central City,
telling him to remain in Atlanta until further notice. Jane had paid a
man liberally to drive through the country to get the telegram off in
time. It would not have done to send such a wire from Central City. All
these things had so happened as though the very fates themselves were in
league against Kenneth.</p>
<p>In total ignorance of what had happened to Mamie and Bob and the
eventful chain of happenings since he had left Central City three days
before, Kenneth sat in the stuffy, odorous, and dirty Jim Crow car,
busied with his thoughts. A noisy and malodorous Negro sat next to him
who seemed to know some person at every one of the thousand and one
stations at which they stopped. Kenneth sat next to the window. His
companion leaned over him to stick his  head out of the window to shout
loud-mouthed and good-natured greetings to his friends on the ground. At
those few stations where he knew no one, he would ask foolish, sometimes
humorous questions of those he did not know. Kenneth stood it as long as
he could and then requested the troublesome fellow to be less annoying.
Kenneth, though vexed, was amused at the man’s complaint to another of
his kind behind him. “Humph!” he grunted. “Tha’s whut I say ‘bout a
dressed-up nigger—thinks he owns the train. I paid jes’ as much,” he
declared more aggressively, “as he did, an’ ef he don’t like it, he can
git off and walk.” At this, a long laugh at his own witty remark, but
Kenneth looked out of the window and paid no attention to him. His
thoughts were busy with other things.</p>
<p>Every few minutes he would feel the lump in the lower right-hand
vest-pocket with a touch that was almost loving in its tenderness. He
hoped Jane would like the ring—it had cost a little more than he had
expected to pay or could afford, but the best was none too good for a
girl like her. He could see Jane’s eyes now when he opened the little
box and she for the first time saw the glittering facets of the
beautiful stone. He smiled in anticipation of her joy. And then he’d put
it on her finger and she’d put her arms around his neck and he’d feel
again her warm, soft, passionate, clinging lips. Lucky he didn’t get too
deeply tied up with that girl years ago in New York. She had kissed as
though she’d had long practice at it. Too sophisticated—nothing like Jane. Jane wasn’t
experienced in kissing—but the thrill it gave him! It was funny about
girls. Most of them didn’ think a kiss meant very much. He had kissed
one—two—three—four—oh, lots of them! But all of them put together
couldn’t begin to equal in warmth, the vividness of one kiss from
Jane.</p>
<p>And just think of it—six weeks from now, and Jane would be
Mrs. Kenneth B. Harper! My, but that sounded good! Reverend Wilson would
marry them. Then they’d go to Atlantic City for their honeymoon.</p>
<p>Hoped the cotton crop would turn out well. Then he’d be able to
collect some of those long-outstanding accounts from the farmers. That
money would come in mighty handy right now. That’s the devil of being a
country doctor. You had to wait until the cotton crop was gathered and
sold before you could collect the bulk of what’s due you. And if the
cotton failed or the market was so flooded the price was down, you’d
have to wait on the most of them until the next year. Sometimes two or
three years. Dr. Johnson over at Vidalia had some accounts that’re six
years old. Oh, well, they’re good anyway. Couldn’t expect to practise in
the country districts unless you were willing to wait for your
money.</p>
<p>Wonder why this darned train doesn’t make better time. Slow as all
outdoors. Like molasses in winter-time. If it only gets in on time, I’ll
surprise Jane by running in on her on the way home.  Due in at five-fifty. Let’s see, it’s
four-thirty now. Where are we now? Hoopersville. Nearly ninety miles yet
to go. Good Lord, won’t get in until nearly eight o’clock! Hope we won’t
lose any more time. Don’t see why so darned many people are travelling
to-day anyhow. Just slows up the train, getting on and off with their
ten bundles and suitcases each.</p>
<p>Wonder how Bob feels about going to school.</p>
<p>Hope he’ll like the shirts I bought him. Ought to. Cost four dollars
apiece. Prices are certainly high. Few years ago you could get the best
shirts on the market for a dollar and a half apiece—not more than two
dollars.</p>
<p>I can see Jane now. Let’s see, it’s five o’clock. Probably getting
supper. Glad she can cook so well. Most girls nowadays can’t boil water
without burning it.</p>
<p>He reflected on the unusual conversation he had had the night before
with Dr. Scott, John Anthony, and Gordon. It was good to know there were
some white men who were thinking seriously on the race problem. And
trying to be fair. Most white Southerners were modern Pontius Pilates.
Figuratively and literally, mentally and morally, they washed their
hands of all personal responsibility for the increasing complexities of
the race question. He wondered how many more men there were in the South
like those three. Broadminded but afraid to speak out. Ewing, Judge
Stevenson, Scott, Anthony, Gordon—all by word or action seemed  mortally afraid lest the
public know they were even thinking of justice. How soon, he wondered,
would they gain sufficient courage to take a manly stand? Would that
time come before the inevitable clash that continued oppression would
cause?</p>
<p>Coloured folks weren’t going to stand it much longer. They were
organizing up North and even in the South to use legal means to better
their lot. But some of them were getting desperate. Armed resistance
would be foolish. Would be certain death. At any rate, even that would
be better than what has been going on.</p>
<p>Good Lord, he reflected, let’s forget the race problem awhile! A
Negro never gets away from it. He has it night and day. Like the sword
of Damocles over his head. Like a cork in a whirling vortex, it tosses
him this way and that, never ceasing. Have to think about something else
or it’ll run him crazy. Guess Mary Ewing’s about out of danger now.</p>
<p>Glad when she’s all right again. Don’t like to be going over there to
those white folks’ house. Neighbours might begin to talk. How much can I
charge Roy Ewing? Two hundred dollars? Yes, he can stand it. Hope he’ll
pay me soon. Can use it when Jane and I go on our honeymoon. Just about
cover our expenses. Honeymoon. Always thought it a darned silly name.
But it doesn’t sound so bad now. Not when it was mine and Jane’s.</p>
<p>Thank Goodness, there’s Ashland! Next stop’s Central City. Be home in
an hour. Guess I’ll go home first and take a bath and put on some clean
 clothes. Feel dirty all
over and there are a thousand cinders down my back. Ugh, but this is a
nasty ride! Hope Bob’ll be at the train with the car. …</p>
<p>Kenneth descended from the train and looked for Bob. He wasn’t there.
He looked around for some other coloured man to drive him home. He knew
it was useless to try and get any of the white taxi-drivers to take him
home—they would have considered it an insult to be asked to drive a
Negro. He thought it strange that there were no Negroes to be seen.
Usually there were crowds of them. It formed the biggest diversion of
the day for white and coloured alike to see the train come in. It was
the familiar longing for travel—adventure contact with the larger and
more interesting things of the outside world, though none of them could
have given a reasonable statement of the fundamental psychological
reactions they were experiencing when they went to the station. They
never thought of it in that light—it was simply a pleasurable item in
the day’s course. That was enough.</p>
<p>When he found no one around, Kenneth picked up his bag and started
down the platform to the street. He noticed, but paid little attention
to, the silence that fell over the various groups as he passed. He heard
a muttered oath but it never occurred to him that it might have any
possible connection with himself. Intent on reaching home, seeing the
folks, telephoning Hiram Tucker that his wife had passed safely through
her operation and was resting well—eager to get freshened up and go over to
Jane’s, he cut across a field that would save a half-mile walk instead
of going the longer route through Lee Street and town. Swinging along in
a long, free stride reminiscent of his army days, he continued the
musing he had done on the train.</p>
<p>He thought nothing of the fact that his house was darkened. He rang
the bell but no one answered. Thinking his mother and Mamie were out
visiting in the neighbourhood, he dug down in his bag, got his keys, and
let himself into the house. His mother was coming down the stairs, an
oil lamp in her hands. As he went up to kiss her, he noticed her eyes
were sunken and red. Anxiously he inquired the reason.</p>
<p>“Oh, Kenneth, my boy—my boy—haven’t you heard?”</p>
<p>She burst into a torrent of weeping, her head on his shoulders. He
took the lamp from her hand perplexedly and placed it on the table.</p>
<p>“Heard what, mamma? What’s the matter? What’s happened? Why are you
crying like this? What’s wrong?”</p>
<p>The questions poured out of him like a flood. For some time his
mother could not speak. Her sobs racked her body. Though she tried to
control herself, every effort to do so but caused her to weep the more.
Kenneth, puzzled, waited until she could gain control of herself. He
thought it funny she carried on this way—she’d never acted like this
before. She had always been so well poised. But  his alarm and feeling of impending disaster
increased to definite proportions when the flood of tears seemed
endless.</p>
<p>“Where’s Bob?” he asked, thinking that he could find out from his
brother what had gone wrong. At this a fresh burst of weeping greeted
him. He led her into his reception room and sat her down on the lounge
and himself beside her. At last, between body-tearing sobs, she told
him.</p>
<p>“Great God!” he shouted. “No! No! Mamma, it can’t be true! It can’t
be true!” But even as he demanded that she tell him it was not true, he
knew it was. …</p>
<p>Mrs. Harper’s lamentations were even as those of that other Rachel
who wept for her children because they were not. Kenneth sat stunned. It
was too terrible—too devastating—too cataclysmic a tragedy to
comprehend! Mamie—his own dear little sister—torn, ravished, her life
ruined! Bob—with all his fire and ambition, his deep sensitiveness to
all that was fine and beautiful, as well as his violent hatred of the
mean, the petty, the vicious, the unjust, the sordid-Bob-his
brother—dead at the hands of a mob! Thank God, he had died before they
laid hands on him!</p>
<p>He laughed—an agonized, terrible mockery that made his mother look at
him sharply. He had been a damned fool! He thought bitterly of his
thoughts on the train a few hours before. Good God, how petty, how
trivial they seemed now! Surely that couldn’t have been just hours ago?
It must have  been
centuries—ages—æons since. He heard the crickets chirping outside the
window. From down the street there floated a loud laugh. His wilted
collar annoyed him. Cinders from the train scratched his back. He
wondered how in such a circumstance he could be conscious of such
mundane things.</p>
<p>He laughed again. His mother had ceased her loud wails of grief and
sat rocking to and fro, her arms folded tightly across her breast as
though she held there the babe who had grown up and met so terrible a
fate. Low, convulsive sobs of anguish seemed to come from her innermost
soul. … She anxiously touched Kenneth on the shoulder as he laughed. It
had a wild, a demoniacal, an eerie ring to it that terrified her. …</p>
<p>What was the use of trying to avoid trouble in the South, he thought?
Hell! Hadn’t he tried? Hadn’t he given up everything that might
antagonize the whites? Hadn’t he tried in every way he could to secure
and retain their friendship? By God, he’d show them now! The
white-livered curs! The damned filthy beasts! Damn trying to be a good
Negro! He’d fight them to the death! He’d pay them back in kind for what
they had brought on him and his!</p>
<p>He sprang to his feet. A fierce, unrelenting, ungovernable hatred
blazed in his eyes. He had passed through the most bitter five minutes
of his life. Denuded of all the superficial trappings of civilization,
 he stood there the
primal man—the wild beast, cornered, wounded, determined to
fight—fight—fight! The fire that lay concealed in the flint until
struck, now leaped up in a devastating flame at the blows it had
received! All the art of the casuist with which he had carefully built
his faith and a code of conduct was cast aside and forgotten! He would
demand and take the last ounce of flesh—he would exact the last drop of
blood from his enemies with all the cruelty he could invent!</p>
<p>His mother, whom he had forgotten in the intensity of his hatred,
became alarmed at the light in his eyes. He shook off the hand with
which she would have restrained him.</p>
<p>“Oh, Ken!” she cried anxiously. “What’re you going to do?”</p>
<p>“I’m going to kill every damned ‘Cracker’ I find!” She fell to her
knees in an agony of supplication and clung to him, the while he tried
to loose her arms from around his knees. He shook as with a chill—his
face had become vengeful, ghastly. Filled with a Berseker rage, he was
eager to tear with his hands a white man—any white man—limb from
limb.</p>
<p>“Kenneth, my boy! My boy!” cried his mother. “You’re all I’ve got
left! Don’t leave me! Don’t leave me! My little Bob is dead! My Mamie is
ruined! You’re all I’ve got! You’re all I’ve got! Don’t leave me,
lambkins! Don’t leave your old mother all alone, honey!”</p>
<p>In her torture at the prospect of losing this, her  last child, she used again
the endearing names she had called him when he was a babe in her
arms—endearments she had not used since.</p>
<p>“Mamma, I’ve got to! I’ve got to! God, if I only can find those who
killed him!” he shouted. She, like a drowning person, clutched at the
fragile straw his last words implied. Her voice was almost a prayer.</p>
<p>“But you don’t know, Ken, you don’t know who was in the mob!” she
cried. “That Jim Archer and Charley Allen—they’re the only ones Mamie
recognized! And they’re dead—they’ve paid! My little Bob killed them!
Who’re you going to get? How’re you going to find out to-night who the
others were? You can’t, Ken, you can’t!”.</p>
<p>She realized this was her only hope. If she could only keep him in
the house the rest of the night, when morning came she was sure he would
be more calm. He would realize then how foolish and foolhardy his
intentions of the night before had been. She pleaded—she begged—she
moaned in her terror. He tried to shake her off. He did loosen her grip
around his knees where she had clung like death itself. As he leaned
over to pry her hands loose and was about to succeed, she grasped his
arm and held on. He tried to jerk his arm loose and rush from the house.
She was struggling now with that fierce, grim, relentless tenacity and
courage of the mother fighting for her young. She held on. His jerks
dragged her over the floor but she was conscious neither of the act nor
the pain. She would have  died there gladly if by so doing she could
restrain her boy from rushing forth to certain death. Oh, yes, he might
get one or two before he died. Maybe five or ten. But the odds were all
against him. Death would most surely overtake him before morning.</p>
<p>Kenneth raged. He cursed in spite of himself. She did not even
comprehend what he said nor the significance of his words. She did not
even consciously hear them. He damned without exception every white man
living. The damned cowards! The filthy curs! The stinking skunks,
fighting a thousand against one!</p>
<p>“Superior race”! “Preservers of civilization”! “Superior,” indeed!
They called Africans inferior! They, with smirking hypocrisy, reviled
the Turks! They went to war against the “Huns” because of Belgium! None
of these had ever done a thing so bestial as these “preservers of
civilization” in Georgia! Civilization! Hell! The damned hypocrites!</p>
<p>The liars! The fiends! “White civilization”! Paugh! Black and brown
and yellow hands had built it! The white fed like carrion on the rotting
flesh of the darker peoples! And called their toil their own! And burned
those on whose bodies their vile civilization was built!</p>
<p>Bob had been right! Bob had been a man! He’d fought and died like a
man! He, Kenneth, with all his professed and vaunted wisdom, was the
coward! He cursed himself! Building a fool’s paradise! A house of cards!
To hell with everything! What  was life worth anyway? Why not end it all
in one glorious orgy of killing?</p>
<p>In his agonized fulmination against the whites and in his vow of
vengeance on those who had dealt him so cruel and heart-sickening a
blow, Kenneth forgot those who had been and were true friends of the
black man—who had suffered and died that he might be free. He forgot
those who, though few in number and largely inarticulate, were fighting
for the Negro even in the South. Kenneth’s grief, however, was too deep
and the blow too crushing for him to think of these in his hour of
despair.</p>
<p>At length his raging subsided a little. His mother was pleading with
him with a fervour he had never believed she possessed. Snatches of her
words penetrated his mind.</p>
<p>“… and who’ll protect Mamie and me? … all alone … you’re all we’ve
got! … need you … need you now as never before … mustn’t leave us now …
mustn’t leave …”</p>
<p>He sank to the floor exhausted by the fierceness of his rage. A
feeble cry came from above stairs. “It’s Mamie!” his mother whispered,
frightened. She left him lying there to rush to her other child. Before
she left she made Kenneth promise he wouldn’t go out before she
returned. He lay on the floor as in a stupor. It was his Gethsemane. He
felt as though some giant hand was twisting his very soul until it bled.
He thought of the hours Mamie had lain in the field after the fiends had
accomplished their foul purpose on her. Bleeding, torn, rayished!  Mamie, always tender, so
unselfish, so unassuming—God, why hadn’t he thought more of her and been
more considerate of her? No, he’d been so wrapped up in his own
happiness and future he’d never given her much attention or thought. Why
hadn’t he? Why had he been so selfish? How could he make up to her for
all his remissness of the past?</p>
<p>That brought to his mind what his mother had said. They did need him
now! More than ever before! How could he have started on his rampage of
revenge had his mother not held him? Where and on whom would he have
begun?</p>
<p>But wasn’t this cowardice not to exact some kind of revenge? He hated
himself at the mere thought of cowardice at this time. Good God, he had
had enough of that all along! Wouldn’t Bob in death curse him if he
failed now to play the man? Or wouldn’t it take more courage to live?
The thought comforted him.</p>
<p>As though the sounds were worlds away, he heard his mother moving in
the room above as she ministered to Mamie’s wants. He heard the noises
of the street. Miles away a dog barked. Nearer a rooster crowed. He
thought of a sermon Reverend Wilson had preached the Sunday before. Of
the Christ in his hour of betrayal. Of Peter denying his Lord. And the
cock crowing thrice. Wasn’t he denying his duty—his family—his
conscience—his all? Back again over the same ground he had already
travelled so thoroughly, his mind went. …</p>
<p>For hours he lay there. The noises of the street  ceased. He heard no more his mother above.
Exhausted with the ordeal through which she had passed, she had probably
fallen asleep. … And yet he did not move. He heard the clock in the hall
strike eleven. … He counted the strokes, marvelling the while that time
was yet measured in hours and minutes and days. … His soul was even as
the body of a woman in travail. …</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XXI
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">K</span><span class="smallcaps">enneth</span> lay on the floor he knew not how long.
At last he awakened to the realization that his telephone was ringing
furiously.</p>
<p>Subconsciously he was aware of the fact that it had been ringing for
some time. He lay there and let it ring.
Telephone—office—house—profession—life itself—all seemed vague and
nebulous phenomena remote from his existence far from him and as
uninteresting to him as life on Mars.</p>
<p>The raucous dissonance continued. “R-r-r-r-r,” the bell seemed to
scream in its existence. It was like a mosquito in a darkened room when
one wanted to get to sleep. “Damn the telephone!” he cried aloud. “Let
the fool thing ring its head off!”…</p>
<p>He thought of Jane. He wondered if she would be content to remain in
Central City after the disasters to Mamie and Bob. If she didn’t, then
they’d part. He was going to stay there if all hell froze over until he
found who had composed the mob that had killed Bob. Until he had wreaked
the utmost in vengeance upon them. … But Jane would feel just as he did.
She was no coward! Hadn’t she been the one to awaken him to the
asininity of his own course in trying to keep away from the race  problem? No, she’d stick! She
wasn’t the quitting kind! …</p>
<p>The telephone bell shrilled as though it were human—it sounded like a
vinegar-dispositioned virago berating her spouse. It paused only,
apparently, to catch enough breath to break forth again. Its shrieking
reverberations beat upon his eardrums in wave after wave of sound until
it seemed as though he would go mad. “Why doesn’t the fool get it
through his head that there’s nobody here to answer?” he exclaimed in
vexation that bordered on hysteria. He pressed the heels of his palms
against his ears as tightly as he could. That was better! He could hear
himself think now. …</p>
<p>Mamie and her mother couldn’t stay in Central City, though. Too
terrible for them—especially for Mamie to stay here where she couldn’t
help but see, every day, things that’d remind her of her awful
experience. And where fool people would come in with long faces to
sympathize with her and drive her mad. People were such asses! Why
didn’t they have sense enough to show their sympathy by staying away?
Instead of coming in and sitting around, talking empty nothings by the
hour? Old Mrs. Amos would be that way. And Mrs. Bradley. They were such
nuisances. Wonder if he hadn’t better send Mamie and mamma to
Philadelphia to his Uncle Will? Or would it be best to send them to
Virginia to his Uncle Jim? No, that wouldn’t do. Best for them to leave
the South entirely. Where  they could get away from everything that’d
remind them of Georgia. No, they’d go to Philadelphia. Suppose
Mrs. Tucker’s about able to take some slight nourishment now. Good Lord,
had he performed the operation only yesterday morning?</p>
<p>That couldn’t be possible! Too much has come in between then and now.
Must have operated on her in a previous existence. And died since.
Reincarnation? Yes, that’s the word. Never thought he’d actually
experience it himself. …</p>
<p>His arms and hands became tired from pressing on his ears. His ears
ached. He loosened the pressure on them a bit. The telephone was yet
ringing. Lord, he moaned, the thing will drive me crazy! Won’t be able
to live long enough to get those damned scoundrels who murdered Bob. He
decided to answer it, curse the voice on the other end, and hang up. He
tried to get up from the floor. There was a terrible pain in his legs.
He was sore all over. He crawled over to the desk in his office and
painfully pulled himself to a seat in his office chair. He stretched his
arm out to pull the telephone to him. A sharp twinge shot through his
arm and he groaned. He caught the cord in his hands and slowly pulled
the instrument to him and placed the receiver to his ear. At first he
could not speak. He made several ineffectual efforts. At last a faint,
hoarse “Hello” was wafted into the mouthpiece.</p>
<p>“Oh, Rachel, I’m so glad to hear your voice. This is
Mrs. Ewing—Mrs. Roy Ewing over on Georgia  Avenue. I’ve been trying to get you for
half a hour. Has your son come home from Atlanta yet?”</p>
<p>The voice went chattering on while Kenneth tried to moisten his
parched throat sufficiently to speak. It seemed to him that his
saliva-producing gland must have died along with his hope of a peaceful
existence in Central City. Finally, he was able to speak. He answered
Mrs. Ewing wearily:</p>
<p>“This isn’t Mrs. Harper, Mrs. Ewing. This is Dr. Harper.”</p>
<p>“Oh, my God! Why did you come back?” she exclaimed.</p>
<p>Puzzled at her tone, Kenneth abruptly answered: “Why shouldn’t I have
come back?”</p>
<p>She laughed nervously</p>
<p>“Nothing—oh, nothing. But I’m awfully sorry about what’s happened.”
At a disbelieving grunt that came to her over the wire, she hastened to
add: “Really I am—I am from the very bottom of my heart!”</p>
<p>She went on philosophically before Kenneth could reply.</p>
<p>“But everything’ll come out all right, don’t you fear. Doctor, I’m so
glad for one reason you’re back. Mary’s had a set-back and she’s in an
awful fix. Dr. Bennett can’t do nothing for her. I know it’s awful hard
to ask you, but can’t you come over and see what you⸺”</p>
<p>“No, damn it, no!” shouted Kenneth into the mouthpiece. His voice
mounted higher and higher in the rage that possessed him. “No, I hope
she’ll  die—I hope
she’ll die! And every other white beast that’s living! No! No! No! No!”
he shouted as though mad.</p>
<p>He started to slam the receiver down upon its hook. The voice of
Mrs. Ewing came to him in an agonized moan and made him pause.</p>
<p>“Oh, Doctor, don’t take it out on my po’ little Mary. I know just how
you feel, but don’t blame it on her! Please, Doctor, please come over
and I’ll never bother you again! If you don’t come, I jus’ know she’ll
die!” she begged.</p>
<p>Kenneth’s fit of passion had passed. In its stead there came a cold,
terrifying calmness that was but another form of the raging torment and
fury in his breast. He spoke with biting directness into the
telephone:</p>
<p>“Mrs. Ewing, if by raising one finger I could save the whole white
race from destruction, and by not raising it could send them all
straight down to hell, I’d die before I raised it! You’ve murdered my
brother, my sister’s body, my mother’s mind, and my very soul! No, I
know that,” he said to her interjected remark, which he repeated. “I
know you didn’t do it with your own hands! But you belong to the race
that did! And the race that’s going to pay for every murder it’s
committed!”</p>
<p>He paused for breath and then continued his vitriolic diatribe
against the white race. It was relieving his brain, he found, to be able
thus to vent his spleen on a white person. He went on in the same voice
of deadly calm and precision of statement:</p>
<p> “And where’s that
cowardly husband of yours?” he demanded in a voice of rising fury. “Why
didn’t he come and ask me to save your daughter? No, he’s like the rest
of the damned cowards—makes his wife do it, thinking I’m fool enough not
to know he’s there at the telephone telling you what to say. No, no,
wait until I’m through! … He’s where? Atlanta? What’s he doing there?
Why did he leave his daughter when he knew she might die any minute? Oh,
no! You can’t feed me any bait like that! I’m through, I tell you—I’m
through listening to the lying flattery you white folks use to fool
ignorant and blind Negroes like me! What? Why—I don’t see—don’t
understand! Oh, well, I suppose I might as well, then. Yes, I’ll be over
within ten minutes. Tell Dr. Bennett to wait there until I come. What?
He’s gone! All right, I’ll come! Good-bye!”</p>
<p>Slightly puzzled, he hung up the receiver and sat for a minute gazing
at the desk pad in front of him, but seeing nothing. Why should Roy
Ewing have gone to Atlanta to see him? Ewing knew he’d be back on
Friday. He had told him so before leaving. It was mighty strange for him
to act that way.</p>
<p>His mother entered the room, awakened by the sound of his shouting
over the telephone. She spoke to him apologetically for having left him
so long.</p>
<p>“Mamie was so restless,” she explained, “and when I got her quiet at
last, I must have fallen asleep sitting there by her bed.” On her face
there came a  wistful
smile. “You see, I haven’t been to sleep for three days now.”</p>
<p>Kenneth went to her and put his arm around her.</p>
<p>“That’s all right, mamma, that’s all right. I’m glad you did get a
minute’s rest. You needed it. What’s that? Oh, yes, I feel much better
now. The storm has passed for a time, I reckon. I’m going to run over to
the Ewings’ for a minute—Mary’s in a bad way. Oh, that’s all right, you
needn’t worry,” he hastily interjected at his mother’s cry of alarm.
“The streets are empty now—everybody’s in bed. I’ll go there and come
straight back as soon as Mary’s resting easily again,” he promised in
order to quiet her fears. “There won’t be anybody for me to see on the
streets, much less start any trouble with. You go to bed and I’ll come
in and sit with you for a few minutes when I come back.”</p>
<p>With this promise Mrs. Harper had to be content. Her fears allayed,
Kenneth kissed her and helped her up the stairs to her room. Going back
to his office, he put the things in his bag he would be likely to need,
went out to the garage in the rear, cranked up the Ford, and drove over
to Georgia Avenue to treat a white patient less than seventy-two hours
after the double catastrophe which had descended upon him and his family
at the hands of those same white people.</p>
<p>As he drove out of the yard, he heard his mother call from her
window: “Hurry back, sonny.” It had been more than fifteen years since
she had last  called him
that. … He drove through the darkened streets of Central City-down Lee
Street past the deserted business houses, past the Confederate Monument,
and on across that intangible, yet vivid line that separated the élite
of the whites of Central City from the less favoured. …</p>
<p>His mind intent on his own tragedy, Kenneth drove on, guiding his car
without conscious volition, mechanically. His conscious mind was too
busy revolving the string of events and trying to find some solid spot,
it mattered not how small, on which he could set mental foot. …</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XXII
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">F</span><span class="smallcaps">ifteen</span> men sat around a table in an office on
Lee Street. There was above them a single electric-light bulb,
fly-specked, without a shade over it. At eleven o’clock they had
silently crept up the stairs after looking cautiously up and down the
deserted expanse of Lee Street to see if they were observed. Like some
silent, creeping, wolf-like denizen of the forest, each had stolen as
noiselessly as possible up the stairs. The window carefully covered, no
ray of light could be seen from the outside. Though unsigned, the
mysterious note each of the fifteen had received that morning had
brought them all together promptly.</p>
<p>A fat man, with tiny eyes set close together, looking from amazing
convolutions of flesh which gave him the appearance of a Poland-China
hog just before slaughtering-time, was giving instructions to the men as
they eagerly and closely followed his words. He occasionally emphasized
his points by pounding softly on the pine table before him with large,
over-sized fists covered profusely with red hair. He was clad in a
nondescript pair of trousers, a reddish faded colour from much wear and
the red dust of his native hills, a shirt open at the neck and of the
same colour as the trousers, the speaker’s neck  innocent of collar and tie. He was ending
his instructions:</p>
<p>“… Now you-all mus’ r’member all I said. You mus’n’ fail! When the
accident happens”—here he laughed softly as he emphasized the word
“accident,” and was rewarded by an appreciative titter from his audience
“when the accident happens, you ain’t t’breathe a word to anybody ‘bout
it! Even th’ others here to-night!”</p>
<p>He paused impressively and allowed his eyes slowly to traverse the
group, resting upon each man in turn a penetrating, malevolent stare.
Measuring his words carefully, he spat them out like bullets from a
Browning gun.</p>
<p>“Th’ mos’—important—thing—you got to r’member is this! You’re not—to
repo’t—back to me or any off’cer—of the Invis’ble Empire!” He paused
again. “After—the “accident”—happens!” he added.</p>
<p>“I reck’n that’s all you need to know,” he said in dismissal. “He
came back t’night from Atlanty! We’ve got the newspaper fixed! Ef any of
you is arrested, I don’t reck’n She’ff Parker’ll hol’ you long!” he
concluded with a confident laugh in which his companion joined. …</p>
<p>Though there was none to hear or see, they dispersed with silent and
cautious movements and voices. They crept down the unlighted stairs,
hands extended, fingers touching the walls on either side to aid them in
making as little noise as possible. As the foremost reached the landing
at the botton, he drew back sharply as he was about to step into the
street.</p>
<p> “Sh-h-h-h!” he
cautioned the others behind him. “Somebody’s comin’ lickety-split down
the road in a Ford!”</p>
<p>They all waited with bated breath. The leader peered forth cautiously
to see who it was stirring about at that time of night. The others
waited, poised on the stairs above him.</p>
<p>Lee Street was bathed alternately in moonlight and shadow as a
vagrant moon wove its way in front of and behind small patches of
clouds. The clattering car approached—came abreast the doorway—and
passed rapidly by</p>
<p>“It’s that damn nigger himself!” he exclaimed to the men behind him.
“What’n th’hell’s he doin’ out this time of night ‘round here? An’
headed towards Georgy Avenue, too! It’s damn funny!”</p>
<p>There was an outburst of excited whispering. Various speculative
surmises were offered. None was able to offer a sensible reason for
Kenneth’s nocturnal pilgrimage. One proposed that Kenneth be followed to
see where he went and why he went there. Afar off could be heard the
puttering of the engine. And then it stopped.</p>
<p>“Ain’t gone far,” one of them declared. They set out to trail the
automobile. Before they had gone two blocks, they saw Kenneth down the
street as he tinkered with the engine of the car, the hood raised. One
of the wires connecting with a sparkplug had become loosened. He quickly
screwed it tight again, started the engine, and drove off, as he was
closely watched from the shadows of trees and  fences by his trailers. They pushed forward
to keep as close as they could, hoping to be guided by the sound of the
engine.</p>
<p>He drove but a few yards more and then drew up and stopped in front
of Roy Ewing’s house. Getting out, he took his bag from the floor of the
car and entered the house quickly as the door opened to admit him.</p>
<p>There was another short session of excited whispering among the
watchers.</p>
<p>“What’n the hell’s he goin’ to Roy Ewing’s house for?” one of them
demanded. “Roy Ewing went t’Atlanty this mornin’ on important business!
Heard him tell George Baird down t’ the bank to-day he was goin’!”</p>
<p>“Th’ damn sneaky bastard!” another one declared venomously. “I
thought he was mighty slick, but didn’t know he was foolin’ ‘round with
a woman like Roy Ewing’s wife! I allus said these niggers who went to
France an’ ran with those damn French-women’d try some of that same
stuff when they came back! Ol’ Vardaman was right! Ought never t’ have
let niggers in th’army anyhow!”</p>
<p>And so it went. They had caught the “slick nigger” with the goods on
him! They talked eagerly among themselves in subdued tones as to what
would be the best course to pursue. Some were all for rushing into the
house and catching them together. None of them entertained the opinion
that Kenneth could have gone to Roy Ewing’s house with Roy Ewing out of
town for any other purpose than for  sexual adventure. Their convictions were
strengthened when the light in the lower hall which had been shining
when the door was opened to admit Kenneth was extinguished, and another
appeared in a few minutes in the bedroom on the second floor which faced
on the streets, and the shades lowered. …</p>
<p>The fat man who had been speaking in the office on Lee Street a few
minutes before abruptly ended the conjecturing.</p>
<p>“‘Tain’t no use t’ stand here all night talkin?!” he asserted. “We’ll
jus’ stay here and see what’s goin’ t’ happen! Looks damn funny t’ me!
Tom! You ‘n’ Sam ‘n’ Jake go ‘roun to th’ back do’ an’ watch there!
Bill! You ‘n’ Joe ‘n’ Henry watch that side do’! Me ‘n’ the res’ll stay
here and watch th’ front do’! Then, when he sneaks out, we’ll get him
any way he comes!” …</p>
<p>Within the house, Kenneth, all unaware of what was going on outside,
was listening to Mrs. Ewing as she excitedly told him of Mary’s change
for the worse, and as she explained her husband’s absence. She was so
worried over her daughter’s condition that Kenneth realized she would
never be able to solve the mystery of her words over the telephone until
he had done what he could for Mary. He therefore asked no questions but
followed her up the stairs to Mary’s room, although his brain was
whirling, it seemed to him, like the blades of an electric fan.</p>
<p>Mary Ewing was in a worse condition than even her mother knew. This
Kenneth realized as soon  as he looked into her flushed face and
measured her pulse and temperature. He questioned Mrs. Ewing as to her
daughter’s diet. The cause of her relapse became clear to him when she
told him with a naïve innocence that since Mary had begged so hard that
day for something to eat, she had, with Dr. Bennett’s consent, given her
a glass of milk and a small piece of fried chicken. Kenneth set to work.
He knew it was useless to berate the mother for disregarding his express
orders that Mary should be given no solid food for at least ten days. He
knew that Dr. Bennett’s word counted more than his. This in spite of the
fact that Dr. Bennett had done nothing but the ordinary measuring-out of
pills and panaceas which he had been taught almost half a century ago in
a third or fourth-rate Southern medical school. Dr. Bennett knew
medicine no later than that of the early eighties. But Dr. Bennett was a
white man—he a Negro!</p>
<p>As he laboured, he suffered again the agony of those hours he had
spent on the floor in his reception room earlier that night. It brought
to life again his bitterness. His skin was black! Therefore, though he
had studied in the best medical school in America, though he had been an
interne for one whole year in the city hospital at New York, though he
had had army experience, though he had spent some time in study in the
best university in France, and, save in pre-war Germany, the best
medical school in Europe, his word and his medical knowledge and skill
were inferior to that of an ignorant, lazy country doctor  in Georgia! When, oh, when,
he thought, will Americans get sense enough to know that the colour of a
man’s skin has nothing whatever to do with that man’s ability or
brain?</p>
<p>A fleeting, devilish temptation assailed him. He tried to put it from
him. He succeeded for a time. And then back it came, leering
loathsomely, grinning in impudent, demoniac fashion at him! Here, lying
helpless before him, was a representative of that race which had done
irreparable, irremedial harm to him and his. Why not let her serve as a
vicarious sacrifice for that race? It wouldn’t be murder! He did not
need to do anything other than hold back the simple things needed to
save her life. No one would ever know. He’d tell the Ewings that they
had killed their own daughter by giving food she should not have had.
Old Bennett didn’t know enough to detect that he, Kenneth Harper, a
Negro, a “damned nigger,” had failed to do the things he could have
done.</p>
<p>The thought charmed him. He toyed with it in his mind. He examined it
from every possible angle. Yes, by God! He’d do it! It’d serve the
Ewings right! The punishment would be just what they deserved! It would
be a double one. They’d lose their daughter. And they’d be eaten up with
remorse the rest of their days because by disobeying his orders in
giving food to Mary Ewing they themselves, her parents, had killed her!
Murderers!</p>
<p>That’s what they’d be! Like all the rest of their stinking brood!</p>
<p>He pictured the scene in which he’d play the leading rôle on the following day. The
pleasurable tingle this thought brought him caused a hard smile to come
to his lips. Mary’d be lying downstairs in the parlour in her coffin.
Roy Ewing and his damned, snivelling wife would be howling and crying
and mourning upstairs. He, Kenneth Harper, a Negro, a “damned nigger,”
would be standing triumphantly over them, castigating and flaying their
very souls with his biting words of denunciation! Tongue in cheek, he’d
rage! He’d tell them they were fools, villains, murderers,
child-killers!</p>
<p>The words he’d use sprang to his mind. “You murdered Mary
yourselves!” he’d say. “Didn’t I tell you not to give her any food for
ten days?” he’d demand. And then they’d shiveringly admit that he had
told them those very words. “But, no,” he’d go on, “you wouldn’t listen
to a ‘damned nigger’s’ word! Old Bennett, who doesn’t know as much about
medicine as a horse-doctor—probably less—he’s got a white skin! And
mine’s black! Therefore—” his sarcasm would be great right there as he
bowed in mock humility—“<i>therefore</i> you listened to him instead of
me! And, doing so”—here another low bow—“you killed your own daughter!”
Here his voice would rise in violent denunciation: “You’re murderers!
Yes, that’s what you are! You’re murderers! <i>You’ve murdered your own
daughter! And I’m glad of it! I wish every one of you and your dirty
breed lay in the coffin with her! You, who think you’re God’s own pet
little race! You, who think that all the wisdom in the world is</i>
 <i>wrapped in your
dirty little carcasses! And all the virtue! And all the brains!
Everything! Everything! EVERYTHING!”</i></p>
<p>Oh, yes, he’d finish with infinite scorn: <i>“And you’ve got nothing!
Nothing! NOTHING! Nothing but lies and deceit and conceit and filthy,
empty pride!”</i></p>
<p>Lord, but he’d be magnificent! Booth and Tree and Barrymore and all
the rest of the actors they called great, rolled into one, couldn’t
equal his scorn, his raising and lowering of voice, his tremendous
climax! And then he’d walk magnificently from the room, leaving them
huddled there like whipped curs!</p>
<p>His maniacal exultation swept him on and on. He had stopped
ministering to the sick girl on the bed before him. He leaned back with
a terrible leer on his face as he watched the half-unconscious form
before him struggling in her pain. The strain of the horrible day which
had started out so radiantly and optimistically had been too much for
him. He gloried in the kindly fate that had delivered so opportunely
into his hands one who should serve as a vicarious victim for those who
had struck him mortal blows without cause. He felt that Bob, whatever he
was, was smiling even now in approval of his actions. …</p>
<p>The minutes sped by. Half past twelve! One o’clock! Half past one!
Mrs. Ewing sat anxiously by the bed, not daring to speak. She had
misinterpreted Kenneth’s smile. It had frightened her a little. It’s
because he’d been through so much to-day, she thought. I’ll turn down the light
so it won’t be too great a glare. She did. It never occurred to her that
Kenneth’s smile could mean anything other than that he was gaining
ground in his fight for her little girl’s life. …</p>
<p>Outside, the fifteen waited. … Minutes, hours passed. It grew cold.
The strain was getting irksome. They watched the room where shone only a
faint light now. They pictured what was going on in that room. It made
their blood boil and grow cold alternately. Two o’clock! They began to
grumble. “Le’s go in an’ get the damn nigger and roast him alive!” some
demanded. “We can’t do that!” the fat man declared. “The damned bitch’ll
yell and wake up the neighbours! She, a <i>white</i> woman, with her
nigger lover! Can’t let it get out she consented! We’ll get him outside
an’ say he was unsuccessful in th’attempt!”… With that they had to be
satisfied. They grumbled, but they knew he was right. Can’t let the
niggers know a white woman willingly went to bed with a nigger! … That’d
never do! Must preserve the reputation of white women! …</p>
<p>Kenneth still sat by Mary’s bed. His eyelids felt heavy. It was hard
to keep them open. Revenge began to lose its savour. Wasn’t so sweet as
it had seemed. What’s the use, he thought, of telling what he had
planned to the Ewings? They wouldn’t understand. They’d never seen great
actors on the stage. All they’d seen was mushy movie actors and silly
women. Like casting pearls before swine!  They’d never appreciate the wonder of his
acting! No, not acting. Irony. Sarcasm. Vials of wrath. Beakers of
gall.</p>
<p>Why does the air seem so heavy? Can’t keep eyes open. Feel like
bathing in chloroform.</p>
<p>Kenneth awakened suddenly from his stupor. Mary was coughing
horribly—gasping—strangling. Her mother cried out sharply. Kenneth
rapidly regained his senses. God! That had been an awful dream.
Feverishly he worked. He called to his aid every artifice known to him.
Valiantly, eagerly, desperately he toiled. Mary had been almost gone.
After what seemed hours, she began to recover the ground she had lost
while Kenneth gloated over his fancied revenge. My God! Just think I was
about to let her die! May the Lord forgive me! …</p>
<p>At last she passed the danger point. She sank into a deep slumber.
She was safe!</p>
<p>Kenneth, wearied beyond measure, rose and stupidly, weariedly, made
preparations to go home.</p>
<p>Mrs. Ewing stopped him.</p>
<p>“You haven’t asked me to tell you why Mr. Ewing went to Atlanta,” she
said.</p>
<p>Dully he asked why he had gone away with his daughter in such a
critical condition, what she had meant by her cryptic remarks over the
telephone. She spoke gladly.</p>
<p>“I couldn’t tell you over the telephone,” she explained. “If anyone
had been listening, it would have been bad for all of us. He went to
Atlanta this morning—it’s yestiddy morning, now—to do  two things. First, to warn
you not to come back to Central City until things has blown over,
because he’d heard threats against you. And most of all to see the
Gov’nor!”</p>
<p>“See the Governor for what?” Kenneth asked.</p>
<p>“Why, to get him to do somethin’ to protect you!” she cried as though
amazed at his ignorance in not seeing.</p>
<p>“Protect me?” Kenneth echoed with a rising, questioning
inflection.</p>
<p>“Yes, to protect you. Y’ see, he knew She’ff Parker couldn’t be
depended on ’cause he’s in with this gang ’round here. He knew the only
chance was through the Guy’nor.”</p>
<p>“But why should <i>I</i> need protection now?” Kenneth asked
wonderingly. “Good God, haven’t these devils done enough to my family
and me already?”</p>
<p>She explained patiently as though talking to a child. Neither of them
realized the unusualness of their situation. Both had forgotten race
lines, time, circumstances, and everything else in the tenseness of the
moment.</p>
<p><i>“B’cause the Ku Kluxers are after you!”</i> she whispered.</p>
<p>“Why should they be after me? I’ve done nothing! My Lord, I’ve tried
in every way I could since I’ve been back in this rotten place to keep
away from trouble⸺” he declared querulously.</p>
<p>“Wait a minute an’ I’ll tell you!” she interrupted him. She took his
arm and led him into the next room where they would not disturb Mary.
“Roy  heard them talking
about you and cursin’ you out about some kind of a society you’ve been
formin’ among the nig—the coloured people. He told ‘em they oughter let
coloured men like you alone ’cause you were a credit to the community.
<i>The nex’ mornin’ he foun’ a warnin’ on the front po’ch from the
Kluxers, sayin’ he’d better stop defendin’ niggers or somethin’d happ’n
to him!”</i></p>
<p>“Oh, that’s all tommyrot, Mrs. Ewing!” Kenneth declared in a
disgusted and disdainful tone. “These silly night-riders wouldn’t dare
do anything to your husband! I don’t believe they’d even try and do
anything to me!”</p>
<p>“You mustn’t talk that way!” she sharply broke in. “They’d do
<i>anythin’!</i> Roy says She’ff Parker’s one of ‘em, and a whole lot
mo’ of the folks you wouldn’ believe was in it!”</p>
<p>Kenneth’s voice became hard and bitter.</p>
<p>“Mrs. Ewing, I’ve tried—God knows I have—to keep away from trouble
with these white people in Central City. If they bother me, I’m going to
fight—you hear me I’m going to fight—and fight like hell! They’ll get me
in the end—I know that—but before I go I’m going to take a few along
with me!”</p>
<p>He left her standing there and went back into Mary’s room. He secured
his bag and started down the stairs. Mrs. Ewing ran after him and caught
him just as he opened the front door. She had to seize his arm to hold
him, as he was impatient to be gone. He felt as though he never wanted
to see a  white face
again as long as he lived. He did not know, nor did Mrs. Ewing, that
several white faces were looking at them as he stood there with Mrs.
Ewing clinging to his arm.</p>
<p>“You will be ca’ful until Roy comes back, won’t you, Doctor?” she
pleaded.</p>
<p>Promising her impatiently, without even comprehending what he
promised, he ran down the steps, eager to get home.</p>
</div>
<div class="chapter">

<h2>
CHAPTER XXIII
</h2>
<p><span class="firstcharacter">K</span><span class="smallcaps">enneth</span> did not see the dark forms that crouched
like tigers in the shrubbery on either side of the long walk that led to
the gate. But as he reached the ground, he turned just in time to see a
shadowy body hurl itself upon him. Instinctively his right arm shot
outwards and upwards. His clenched fist met flush on the point of the
jaw the man who had attempted to hurl him to the ground. His would-be
assailant gave a deep grunt and fell to the ground at Kenneth’s
feet.</p>
<p>Before he hit the ground, however, Kenneth found himself surrounded
by a cursing, howling crowd. He lashed out blindly—hitting wherever he
saw what seemed to be a form. Madly, desperately, gloriously he fought!
For a time he was more than a match for the fifteen that assailed him.
He did not know that they had expected to take him by surprise. The
surprise was now theirs. He heard a voice shout at him in rage:
“Sleepin’ with a white woman, eh! You dirty black bastard!” With
superhuman strength born of hatred, bitterness, and despair, he lunged
at the speaker. Almost at the same time that his fist landed in the
man’s face, his foot went into his stomach with a vengeance. He put into
the blow and  the kick
all the repressed hatred and passion the day’s revelations had brought
forth.</p>
<p>It seemed to him he had been fighting there for hours, days, months!
The odds fifteen to one against him—his strength was as of the fifteen
combined. No Marquis of Queensberry rules here! He knew it was a fight
to the death, and he yelled aloud for sheer joy of the combat! In the
darkness his assailants could not lay hands on him, for he was here,
there, everywhere—hitting, kicking, whirling, ducking blows, jumping
this way and that—a veritable dervish of the deserts in his gyrations!
One after another his opponents went down at his feet! Windows began to
be raised at the tumult. Shouts and cries of inquiry filled the air. But
still Kenneth fought on.</p>
<p>At last he saw an opening. Out went his fist! Down went the man who
met it with his face! Shaking off one who sought to grasp him from
behind, Kenneth stepped over the body of the one who had just gone down
before him, and, like an expert half-back running in a broken field,
darted out to the sidewalk. Fifty—forty—thirty—twenty—ten—five more
yards and he’d be in his car and away! At last, he reached it!
Feverishly he wrenched open the door! He started to spring in! They’d
never get him now!</p>
<p>A shot rang out! Another! Another! Kenneth’s arm flew up. With a low
moan he sank to the street beneath the car. He tried to rise. He
couldn’t.  The bullet
had shattered his leg! On they came, howling, gloating fiendishly—their
rage increased by the mess they’d made of what was intended should be an
easy job! Kenneth saw them come! He groaned and tried to draw the gun
from his hip pocket. It hung in his clothing, pinned down as he was! If
I only can get one or two of them, he thought, before they get me! On
they came! The gun stuck! They had him! They pulled him out from beneath
the car! …</p>
<p>The next morning, in a house in the coloured section of Central City,
there sat a girl. … Her eyes were dry. … Her face was that of despair. …
Her grief was too deep for tears. … In her lap there lay a soft, white,
lustrous, fluffy mass. … It looked like cream charmeuse … looked like a
wedding-gown. … A woman entered the room. … Her eyes were haggard. …
Around her shoulders an apron. … She’d put it on, thinking it a shawl.
…</p>
<p>“Honey! Honey!” she cried. “Mamie was sleeping … so I ran over a
minute.”… She put her arms around the younger woman tenderly. … The dam
broke. … The relief of tears came. … Hot, blinding, scalding tears
rained down on the soft mass that now would never be used. … And the
women cried together. …</p>
<p>In the newspapers of the country there appeared the same day an
Associated Press dispatch. It was  sent out by Nat Phelps, editor of the
Central City <i>Dispatch</i> and local agent for the Associated Press.
It read:</p>
<div class="article">
<div class="headline">
ANOTHER NEGRO LYNCHED IN GEORGIA
</div>
<p>CENTRAL CITY, Ga., Sept. 15.—“Doc” Harper, a negro, was lynched here
to-night, charged with attempted criminal assault on a white woman, the
wife of a prominent citizen of this city. The husband was away from the
city on business at the time, his wife and young daughter, who is
seriously ill, being alone in the house. Harper evidently became
frightened before accomplishing his purpose and was caught as he ran
from the house. He is said to have confessed before being put to death
by a mob which numbered five thousand. He was burned at the stake.</p>
<p>This is the second lynching in Central City this week. On Thursday
morning Bob Harper, a brother of the Negro lynched to-day, was killed by
a posse after he had run amuck and killed two young white men. No reason
could be found for their murder at the hands of the Negro, as they had
always borne excellent reputations in the community. It is thought the
Negro had become temporarily insane.</p>
<p>In a telegram to the Governor to-day, Sheriff Parker reported that
all was quiet in the city and he anticipated no further trouble.</p>
</div>
</div>
