<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span></h2>
			<p>Fifteen men sat around a table in an office on Lee Street. There was above them a single electric-light bulb, fly-specked, without a shade over it. At eleven o’clock they had silently crept up the stairs after looking cautiously up and down the deserted expanse of Lee Street to see if they were observed. Like some silent, creeping, wolf-like denizen of the forest, each had stolen as noiselessly as possible up the stairs. The window carefully covered, no ray of light could be seen from the outside. Though unsigned, the mysterious note each of the fifteen had received that morning had brought them all together promptly.</p>
			<p>A fat man, with tiny eyes set close together, looking from amazing convolutions of flesh which gave him the appearance of a Poland-China hog just before slaughtering-time, was giving instructions to the men as they eagerly and closely followed his words. He occasionally emphasized his points by pounding softly on the pine table before him with large, oversized fists covered profusely with red hair. He was clad in a nondescript pair of trousers, a reddish faded colour from much wear and the red dust of his native hills, a shirt open at the neck and of the same colour as the trousers, the speaker’s neck innocent of collar and tie. He was ending his instructions:</p>
			<p>“… Now you-all mus’ r’member all I said. You mus’n’ fail! When the accident happens”—here he laughed softly as he emphasized the word “accident,” and was rewarded by an appreciative titter from his audience “when the accident happens, you ain’t t’breathe a word to anybody ’bout it! Even th’ others here tonight!”</p>
			<p>He paused impressively and allowed his eyes slowly to traverse the group, resting upon each man in turn a penetrating, malevolent stare. Measuring his words carefully, he spat them out like bullets from a Browning gun.</p>
			<p>“Th’ mos’—important—thing—you got to r’member is this! You’re not—to repo’t—back to me or any off’cer—of the Invis’ble Empire!” He paused again. “After—the “accident”—happens!” he added.</p>
			<p>“I reck’n that’s all you need to know,” he said in dismissal. “He came back t’night from Atlanty! We’ve got the newspaper fixed! Ef any of you is arrested, I don’t reck’n She’ff Parker’ll hol’ you long!” he concluded with a confident laugh in which his companion joined. …</p>
			<p>Though there was none to hear or see, they dispersed with silent and cautious movements and voices. They crept down the unlighted stairs, hands extended, fingers touching the walls on either side to aid them in making as little noise as possible. As the foremost reached the landing at the botton, he drew back sharply as he was about to step into the street.</p>
			<p>“Sh-h-h-h!” he cautioned the others behind him. “Somebody’s comin’ lickety-split down the road in a Ford!”</p>
			<p>They all waited with bated breath. The leader peered forth cautiously to see who it was stirring about at that time of night. The others waited, poised on the stairs above him.</p>
			<p>Lee Street was bathed alternately in moonlight and shadow as a vagrant moon wove its way in front of and behind small patches of clouds. The clattering car approached—came abreast the doorway—and passed rapidly by</p>
			<p>“It’s that damn nigger himself!” he exclaimed to the men behind him. “What’n th’hell’s he doin’ out this time of night ’round here? An’ headed towards Georgy Avenue, too! It’s damn funny!”</p>
			<p>There was an outburst of excited whispering. Various speculative surmises were offered. None was able to offer a sensible reason for Kenneth’s nocturnal pilgrimage. One proposed that Kenneth be followed to see where he went and why he went there. Afar off could be heard the puttering of the engine. And then it stopped.</p>
			<p>“Ain’t gone far,” one of them declared. They set out to trail the automobile. Before they had gone two blocks, they saw Kenneth down the street as he tinkered with the engine of the car, the hood raised. One of the wires connecting with a sparkplug had become loosened. He quickly screwed it tight again, started the engine, and drove off, as he was closely watched from the shadows of trees and fences by his trailers. They pushed forward to keep as close as they could, hoping to be guided by the sound of the engine.</p>
			<p>He drove but a few yards more and then drew up and stopped in front of Roy Ewing’s house. Getting out, he took his bag from the floor of the car and entered the house quickly as the door opened to admit him.</p>
			<p>There was another short session of excited whispering among the watchers.</p>
			<p>“What’n the hell’s he goin’ to Roy Ewing’s house for?” one of them demanded. “Roy Ewing went t’Atlanty this mornin’ on important business! Heard him tell George Baird down t’ the bank today he was goin’!”</p>
			<p>“Th’ damn sneaky bastard!” another one declared venomously. “I thought he was mighty slick, but didn’t know he was foolin’ ’round with a woman like Roy Ewing’s wife! I allus said these niggers who went to France an’ ran with those damn French-women’d try some of that same stuff when they came back! Ol’ Vardaman was right! Ought never t’ have let niggers in th’army anyhow!”</p>
			<p>And so it went. They had caught the “slick nigger” with the goods on him! They talked eagerly among themselves in subdued tones as to what would be the best course to pursue. Some were all for rushing into the house and catching them together. None of them entertained the opinion that Kenneth could have gone to Roy Ewing’s house with Roy Ewing out of town for any other purpose than for sexual adventure. Their convictions were strengthened when the light in the lower hall which had been shining when the door was opened to admit Kenneth was extinguished, and another appeared in a few minutes in the bedroom on the second floor which faced on the streets, and the shades lowered. …</p>
			<p>The fat man who had been speaking in the office on Lee Street a few minutes before abruptly ended the conjecturing.</p>
			<p>“ ’Tain’t no use t’ stand here all night talkin?!” he asserted. “We’ll jus’ stay here and see what’s goin’ t’ happen! Looks damn funny t’ me! Tom! You ’n’ Sam ’n’ Jake go ’roun to th’ back do’ an’ watch there! Bill! You ’n’ Joe ’n’ Henry watch that side do’! Me ’n’ the res’ll stay here and watch th’ front do’! Then, when he sneaks out, we’ll get him anyway he comes!” …</p>
			<p>Within the house, Kenneth, all unaware of what was going on outside, was listening to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing as she excitedly told him of Mary’s change for the worse, and as she explained her husband’s absence. She was so worried over her daughter’s condition that Kenneth realized she would never be able to solve the mystery of her words over the telephone until he had done what he could for Mary. He therefore asked no questions but followed her up the stairs to Mary’s room, although his brain was whirling, it seemed to him, like the blades of an electric fan.</p>
			<p>Mary Ewing was in a worse condition than even her mother knew. This Kenneth realized as soon as he looked into her flushed face and measured her pulse and temperature. He questioned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing as to her daughter’s diet. The cause of her relapse became clear to him when she told him with a naive innocence that since Mary had begged so hard that day for something to eat, she had, with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bennett’s consent, given her a glass of milk and a small piece of fried chicken. Kenneth set to work. He knew it was useless to berate the mother for disregarding his express orders that Mary should be given no solid food for at least ten days. He knew that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bennett’s word counted more than his. This in spite of the fact that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bennett had done nothing but the ordinary measuring-out of pills and panaceas which he had been taught almost half a century ago in a third or fourth-rate Southern medical school. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bennett knew medicine no later than that of the early eighties. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bennett was a white man—he a Negro!</p>
			<p>As he laboured, he suffered again the agony of those hours he had spent on the floor in his reception room earlier that night. It brought to life again his bitterness. His skin was black! Therefore, though he had studied in the best medical school in America, though he had been an interne for one whole year in the city hospital at New York, though he had had army experience, though he had spent some time in study in the best university in France, and, save in prewar Germany, the best medical school in Europe, his word and his medical knowledge and skill were inferior to that of an ignorant, lazy country doctor in Georgia! When, oh, when, he thought, will Americans get sense enough to know that the colour of a man’s skin has nothing whatever to do with that man’s ability or brain?</p>
			<p>A fleeting, devilish temptation assailed him. He tried to put it from him. He succeeded for a time. And then back it came, leering loathsomely, grinning in impudent, demoniac fashion at him! Here, lying helpless before him, was a representative of that race which had done irreparable, irremedial harm to him and his. Why not let her serve as a vicarious sacrifice for that race? It wouldn’t be murder! He did not need to do anything other than hold back the simple things needed to save her life. No one would ever know. He’d tell the Ewings that they had killed their own daughter by giving food she should not have had. Old Bennett didn’t know enough to detect that he, Kenneth Harper, a Negro, a “damned nigger,” had failed to do the things he could have done.</p>
			<p>The thought charmed him. He toyed with it in his mind. He examined it from every possible angle. Yes, by God! He’d do it! It’d serve the Ewings right! The punishment would be just what they deserved! It would be a double one. They’d lose their daughter. And they’d be eaten up with remorse the rest of their days because by disobeying his orders in giving food to Mary Ewing they themselves, her parents, had killed her! Murderers!</p>
			<p>That’s what they’d be! Like all the rest of their stinking brood!</p>
			<p>He pictured the scene in which he’d play the leading role on the following day. The pleasurable tingle this thought brought him caused a hard smile to come to his lips. Mary’d be lying downstairs in the parlour in her coffin. Roy Ewing and his damned, snivelling wife would be howling and crying and mourning upstairs. He, Kenneth Harper, a Negro, a “damned nigger,” would be standing triumphantly over them, castigating and flaying their very souls with his biting words of denunciation! Tongue in cheek, he’d rage! He’d tell them they were fools, villains, murderers, child-killers!</p>
			<p>The words he’d use sprang to his mind. “You murdered Mary yourselves!” he’d say. “Didn’t I tell you not to give her any food for ten days?” he’d demand. And then they’d shiveringly admit that he had told them those very words. “But, no,” he’d go on, “you wouldn’t listen to a ’damned nigger’s’ word! Old Bennett, who doesn’t know as much about medicine as a horse-doctor—probably less—he’s got a white skin! And mine’s black! Therefore—” his sarcasm would be great right there as he bowed in mock humility—“<em>therefore</em> you listened to him instead of me! And, doing so”—here another low bow—“you killed your own daughter!” Here his voice would rise in violent denunciation: “You’re murderers! Yes, that’s what you are! You’re murderers! <em>You’ve murdered your own daughter! And I’m glad of it! I wish every one of you and your dirty breed lay in the coffin with her! You, who think you’re God’s own pet little race! You, who think that all the wisdom in the world is</em> <em>wrapped in your dirty little carcasses! And all the virtue! And all the brains! Everything! Everything! <strong>EVERYTHING!</strong>”</em></p>
			<p>Oh, yes, he’d finish with infinite scorn: <em>“And you’ve got nothing! Nothing! <strong>NOTHING!</strong> Nothing but lies and deceit and conceit and filthy, empty pride!”</em></p>
			<p>Lord, but he’d be magnificent! Booth and Tree and Barrymore and all the rest of the actors they called great, rolled into one, couldn’t equal his scorn, his raising and lowering of voice, his tremendous climax! And then he’d walk magnificently from the room, leaving them huddled there like whipped curs!</p>
			<p>His maniacal exultation swept him on and on. He had stopped ministering to the sick girl on the bed before him. He leaned back with a terrible leer on his face as he watched the half-unconscious form before him struggling in her pain. The strain of the horrible day which had started out so radiantly and optimistically had been too much for him. He gloried in the kindly fate that had delivered so opportunely into his hands one who should serve as a vicarious victim for those who had struck him mortal blows without cause. He felt that Bob, whatever he was, was smiling even now in approval of his actions. …</p>
			<p>The minutes sped by. Half past twelve! One o’clock! Half past one! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing sat anxiously by the bed, not daring to speak. She had misinterpreted Kenneth’s smile. It had frightened her a little. It’s because he’d been through so much today, she thought. I’ll turn down the light so it won’t be too great a glare. She did. It never occurred to her that Kenneth’s smile could mean anything other than that he was gaining ground in his fight for her little girl’s life. …</p>
			<p>Outside, the fifteen waited. … Minutes, hours passed. It grew cold. The strain was getting irksome. They watched the room where shone only a faint light now. They pictured what was going on in that room. It made their blood boil and grow cold alternately. Two o’clock! They began to grumble. “Le’s go in an’ get the damn nigger and roast him alive!” some demanded. “We can’t do that!” the fat man declared. “The damned bitch’ll yell and wake up the neighbours! She, a <em>white</em> woman, with her nigger lover! Can’t let it get out she consented! We’ll get him outside an’ say he was unsuccessful in th’attempt!” … With that they had to be satisfied. They grumbled, but they knew he was right. Can’t let the niggers know a white woman willingly went to bed with a nigger! … That’d never do! Must preserve the reputation of white women! …</p>
			<p>Kenneth still sat by Mary’s bed. His eyelids felt heavy. It was hard to keep them open. Revenge began to lose its savour. Wasn’t so sweet as it had seemed. What’s the use, he thought, of telling what he had planned to the Ewings? They wouldn’t understand. They’d never seen great actors on the stage. All they’d seen was mushy movie actors and silly women. Like casting pearls before swine! They’d never appreciate the wonder of his acting! No, not acting. Irony. Sarcasm. Vials of wrath. Beakers of gall.</p>
			<p>Why does the air seem so heavy? Can’t keep eyes open. Feel like bathing in chloroform.</p>
			<p>Kenneth awakened suddenly from his stupor. Mary was coughing horribly—gasping—strangling. Her mother cried out sharply. Kenneth rapidly regained his senses. God! That had been an awful dream. Feverishly he worked. He called to his aid every artifice known to him. Valiantly, eagerly, desperately he toiled. Mary had been almost gone. After what seemed hours, she began to recover the ground she had lost while Kenneth gloated over his fancied revenge. My God! Just think I was about to let her die! May the Lord forgive me! …</p>
			<p>At last she passed the danger point. She sank into a deep slumber. She was safe!</p>
			<p>Kenneth, wearied beyond measure, rose and stupidly, weariedly, made preparations to go home.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing stopped him.</p>
			<p>“You haven’t asked me to tell you why <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ewing went to Atlanta,” she said.</p>
			<p>Dully he asked why he had gone away with his daughter in such a critical condition, what she had meant by her cryptic remarks over the telephone. She spoke gladly.</p>
			<p>“I couldn’t tell you over the telephone,” she explained. “If anyone had been listening, it would have been bad for all of us. He went to Atlanta this morning—it’s yestiddy morning, now—to do two things. First, to warn you not to come back to Central City until things has blown over, because he’d heard threats against you. And most of all to see the Gov’nor!”</p>
			<p>“See the Governor for what?” Kenneth asked.</p>
			<p>“Why, to get him to do somethin’ to protect you!” she cried as though amazed at his ignorance in not seeing.</p>
			<p>“Protect me?” Kenneth echoed with a rising, questioning inflection.</p>
			<p>“Yes, to protect you. Y’ see, he knew She’ff Parker couldn’t be depended on ’cause he’s in with this gang ’round here. He knew the only chance was through the Guy’nor.”</p>
			<p>“But why should <i>I</i> need protection now?” Kenneth asked wonderingly. “Good God, haven’t these devils done enough to my family and me already?”</p>
			<p>She explained patiently as though talking to a child. Neither of them realized the unusualness of their situation. Both had forgotten race lines, time, circumstances, and everything else in the tenseness of the moment.</p>
			<p><em>“B’cause the Ku Kluxers are after you!”</em> she whispered.</p>
			<p>“Why should they be after me? I’ve done nothing! My Lord, I’ve tried in every way I could since I’ve been back in this rotten place to keep away from trouble—” he declared querulously.</p>
			<p>“Wait a minute an’ I’ll tell you!” she interrupted him. She took his arm and led him into the next room where they would not disturb Mary. “Roy heard them talking about you and cursin’ you out about some kind of a society you’ve been formin’ among the nig—the coloured people. He told ’em they oughter let coloured men like you alone ’cause you were a credit to the community. <em>The nex’ mornin’ he foun’ a warnin’ on the front po’ch from the Kluxers, sayin’ he’d better stop defendin’ niggers or somethin’d happ’n to him!”</em></p>
			<p>“Oh, that’s all tommyrot, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing!” Kenneth declared in a disgusted and disdainful tone. “These silly nightriders wouldn’t dare do anything to your husband! I don’t believe they’d even try and do anything to me!”</p>
			<p>“You mustn’t talk that way!” she sharply broke in. “They’d do <em>anythin’!</em> Roy says She’ff Parker’s one of ’em, and a whole lot mo’ of the folks you wouldn’ believe was in it!”</p>
			<p>Kenneth’s voice became hard and bitter.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing, I’ve tried—God knows I have—to keep away from trouble with these white people in Central City. If they bother me, I’m going to fight—you hear me I’m going to fight—and fight like hell! They’ll get me in the end—I know that—but before I go I’m going to take a few along with me!”</p>
			<p>He left her standing there and went back into Mary’s room. He secured his bag and started down the stairs. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing ran after him and caught him just as he opened the front door. She had to seize his arm to hold him, as he was impatient to be gone. He felt as though he never wanted to see a white face again as long as he lived. He did not know, nor did <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing, that several white faces were looking at them as he stood there with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ewing clinging to his arm.</p>
			<p>“You will be ca’ful until Roy comes back, won’t you, Doctor?” she pleaded.</p>
			<p>Promising her impatiently, without even comprehending what he promised, he ran down the steps, eager to get home.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
